the booke of the generation of iesus christ the sonne of dauid the sonne of abraham.
 abraham begate isaac and isaac begate iacob and iacob begate iudas and his brethren.
 and iudas begate phares and zara of thamar and phares begate esrom and esrom begate aram.
 and aram begate aminadab and aminadab begate naasson and naasson begate salmon.
 and salmon begat boos of rachab and boos begate obed of ruth and obed begate iesse.
 and iesse begate dauid the king dauid the king begat solomon of her that had bin the wife of urias.
 and solomon begat roboam and roboam begate abia and abia begate asa.
 and asa begate iosaphat and iosaphat begate ioram and ioram begate ozias.
 and ozias begat ioatham and ioatham begate achas and achas begate ezekias.
 and ezekias begate manasses and manasses begate amon and amon begate iosias.
 and iosias begate iechonias and his brethren about the time they were caried away to babylon.
 and after they were brought to babylon iechonias begat salathiel and salathiel begate zorobabel.
 and zorobabel begat abiud and abiud begat eliakim and eliakim begate azor.
 and azor begat sadoc sadoc begat achim and achim begat eliud.
 and eliud begate eleazar and eleazar begate matthan and matthan begate iacob.
 and iacob begate ioseph the husband of mary of whom was borne iesus who is called christ.
 so all the generations from abraham to dauid are fourteene generations.
 and from dauid vntill the carying away into babylon are foureteene generations.
 and from the carying away into babylon vnto christ are fourteene generations.
 now the birth of iesus christ was on this wise.
 when as his mother mary was espoused to ioseph before they came together shee was found with childe of the holy ghost.
 then ioseph her husband being a iust man and not willing to make her a publique example was minded to put her away priuily.
 but while hee thought on these things behold the angel of the lord appeared vnto him in a dreame saying ioseph thou sonne of dauid feare not to take vnto thee mary thy wife.
 for that which is conceiued in her is of the holy ghost.
 and she shall bring forth a sonne and thou shalt call his name iesus.
 for hee shall saue his people from their sinnes.
 now all this was done that it might be fulfilled which was spoken of the lord by the prophet saying behold a uirgin shall be with childe and shall bring foorth a sonne and they shall call his name emmanuel which being interpreted is god with vs.
 then ioseph being raised from sleepe did as the angel of the lord had bidden him tooke vnto him his wife.
 and knewe her not till shee had brought forth her first borne sonne and he called his name iesus.
 now when iesus was borne in bethlehem of iudea in the dayes of herod the king behold there came wise men from the east to hierusalem saying where is he that is borne king of the iewes.
 for we haue seene his starre in the east and are come to worship him.
 when herod the king had heard these things he was troubled and all hierusalem with him.
 and when he had gathered all the chiefe priests and scribes of the people together hee demanded of them where christ should be borne.
 and they said vnto him in bethlehem of iudea.
 for thus it is written by the prophet.
 and thou bethlehem in the land of iuda art not the least among the princes of iuda.
 for out of thee shall come a gouernour that shall rule my people israel.
 then herod when he had priuily called the wise men enquired of them diligently what time the starre appeared.
 and he sent them to bethlehem and said goe and search diligently for the yong child and when ye haue found him bring me word againe that i may come and worship him also.
 when they had heard the king they departed and loe the starre which they saw in the east went before them till it came and stood ouer where the young childe was.
 when they saw the starre they reioyced with exceeding great ioy.
 and when they were come into the house they saw the yong child with mary his mother and fell downe and worshipped him.
 and when they had opened their treasures they presented vnto him gifts gold and frankincense and myrrhe.
 and being warned of god in a dreame that they should not returne to herode they departed into their owne countrey another way.
 and when they were departed behold the angel of the lord appeareth to ioseph in a dreame saying arise and take the young childe and his mother and flee into egypt and bee thou there vntill i bring thee word.
 for herode will seeke the young childe to destroy him.
 when he arose he tooke the yong childe and his mother by night and departed into egypt.
 and was there vntill the death of herode that it might be fulfilled which was spoken of the lord by the prophet saying out of egypt haue i called my sonne.
 then herode when hee saw that hee was mocked of the wise men was exceeding wroth and sent foorth and slewe all the children that were in bethlehem and in all the coasts thereof from two yeeres olde and vnder according to the time which he had diligently enquired of the wise men.
 then was fulfilled that which was spoken by ieremie the prophet saying in rama was there a voice heard lamentation and weeping and great mourning rachel weeping for her children and would not be comforted because they are not.
 but when herode was dead behold an angel of the lord appeareth in a dreame to ioseph in egypt saying arise and take the yong childe and his mother and goe into the land of israel.
 for they are dead which sought the yong childes life.
 and he arose and tooke the yong childe and his mother and came into the land of israel.
 but when he heard that archelaus did reigne in iudea in the roome of his father herod hee was afraid to goe thither.
 notwithstanding beeing warned of god in a dreame he turned aside into the parts of galilee.
 and hee came and dwelt in a city called nazareth that it might be fulfilled which was spoken by the prophets he shalbe called a nazarene.
 in those daies came iohn the baptist preaching in the wildernesse of iudea and saying repent yee.
 for the kingdome of heauen is at hand.
 for this is he that was spoken of by the prophet esaias saying the voyce of one crying in the wildernes prepare ye the way of the lord make his paths straight.
 and the same iohn had his raiment of camels haire and a leatherne girdle about his loynes and his meate was locusts and wilde hony.
 then went out to him hierusalem and all iudea and all the region round about iordane and were baptized of him in iordane confessing their sinnes.
 but when he saw many of the pharisees and sadducees come to his baptisme he said vnto them o generation of vipers who hath warned you to flee from the wrath to come.
 bring forth therefore fruits meet for repentance.
 and thinke not to say within your selues wee haue abraham to our father.
 for i say vnto you that god is able of these stones to raise vp children vnto abraham.
 and now also the axe is layd vnto the root of the trees.
 therefore euery tree which bringeth not foorth good fruite is hewen downe and cast into the fire.
 i indeed baptize you with water vnto repentance.
 but he that commeth after mee is mightier then i whose shooes i am not worthy to beare hee shall baptize you with the holy ghost and with fire.
 whose fanne is in his hand and he will throughly purge his floore and gather his wheat into the garner.
 but wil burne vp the chaffe with vnquenchable fire.
 then commeth iesus from galilee to iordane vnto iohn to be baptized of him.
 but iohn forbade him saying i haue need to bee baptized of thee and commest thou to me.
 and iesus answering said vnto him suffer it to be so now.
 for thus it becommeth vs to fulfill all righteousnesse.
 then he suffered him.
 and iesus when hee was baptized went vp straightway out of the water.
 and loe the heauens were opened vnto him and he saw the spirit of god descending like a doue and lighting vpon him.
 and loe a voice from heauen saying this is my beloued sonne in whom i am well pleased.
 then was iesus led vp of the spirit into the wildernesse to bee tempted of the deuill.
 and when hee had fasted forty dayes and forty nights hee was afterward an hungred.
 and when the tempter came to him hee said if thou be the sonne of god command that these stones bee made bread.
 but he answered and said it is written man shall not liue by bread alone but by euery word that proceedeth out of the mouth of god.
 then the deuill taketh him vp into the holy citie and setteth him on a pinacle of the temple and saith vnto him if thou bee the sonne of god cast thy selfe downe.
 for it is written he shall giue his angels charge concerning thee in their handes they shall beare thee vp lest at any time thou dash thy foote against a stone.
 iesus said vnto him it is written againe thou shalt not tempt the lord thy god.
 againe the deuill taketh him vp into an exceeding high mountaine and sheweth him all the kingdomes of the world and the glory of them.
 and saith vnto him all these things will i giue thee if thou wilt fall downe and worship me.
 then saith iesus vnto him get thee hence satan.
 for it is written thou shalt worship the lord thy god and him onely shalt thou serue.
 then the deuill leaueth him and behold angels came and ministred vnto him.
 now when iesus had heard that iohn was cast into prison he departed into galilee.
 and leauing nazareth he came and dwelt in capernaum which is vpon the sea coast in the borders of zabulon and nephthali.
 that it might be fulfilled which was spoken by esaias the prophet saying the land of zabulon and the land of nephthali by the way of the sea beyond iordane galilee of the gentiles.
 the people which sate in darkenesse saw great light.
 and to them which sate in the region and shadow of death light is sprung vp.
 from that time iesus began to preach and to say repent for the kingdome of heauen is at hand.
 and iesus walking by the sea of galilee saw two brethren simon called peter and andrew his brother casting a net into the sea for they were fishers and he saith vnto them follow mee.
 and i will make you fishers of men.
 and they straightway left their nets and followed him.
 and going on from thence hee sawe other two brethren iames the sonne of zebedee and iohn his brother in a ship with zebedee their father mending their nets.
 and he called them.
 and they immediatly left the shippe and their father and followed him.
 and iesus went about all galilee teaching in their synagogues and preaching the gospel of the kingdome and healing all maner of sickenesse and all maner of disease among the people.
 and his fame went thorowout all syria.
 and they brought vnto him all sicke people that were taken with diuerse diseases and torments and those which were possessed with deuils and those which were lunaticke and those that had the palsie and he healed them.
 and there followed him great great multitudes of people from galilee and from decapolis and from hierusalem and from iudea and from beyond iordane.
 and seeing the multitudes he went vp into a mountaine.
 and when he was set his disciples came vnto him.
 and he opened his mouth and taught them saying blessed are the poore in spirit.
 for theirs is the kingdome of heauen.
 blessed are they that mourne.
 for they shall be comforted.
 blessed are the meeke.
 for they shall inherit the earth.
 blessed are they which doe hunger and thirst after righteousnesse.
 for they shall be filled.
 blessed are the mercifull.
 for they shall obtaine mercie.
 blessed are the pure in heart.
 for they shall see god.
 blessed are the peacemakers.
 for they shall bee called the children of god.
 blessed are they which are persecuted for righteousnesse sake.
 for theirs is the kingdome of heauen.
 blessed are ye when men shall reuile you and persecute you and shal say all manner of euill against you falsly for my sake.
 reioyce and be exceeding glad.
 for great is your reward in heauen.
 for so persecuted they the prophets which were before you.
 yee are the salt of the earth.
 but if the salt haue lost his sauour wherewith shall it bee salted.
 it is thenceforth good for nothing but to be cast out and to be troden vnder foote of men.
 yee are the light of the world.
 a citie that is set on an hill cannot be hid.
 neither doe men light a candle and put it vnder a bushell.
 but on a candlesticke and it giueth light vnto all that are in the house.
 let your light so shine before men that they may see your good workes and glorifie your father which is in heauen.
 thinke not that i am come to destroy the lawe or the prophets.
 i am not come to destroy but to fulfill.
 for verily i say vnto you till heauen and earth passe one iote or one title shall in no wise passe from the law till all be fulfilled.
 whosoeuer therfore shall breake one of these least commaundements and shall teach men so he shall be called the least in the kingdome of heauen.
 but whosoeuer shall doe and teach them the same shall be called great in the kingdome of heauen.
 for i say vnto you that except your righteousnesse shall exceede the righteousnesse of the scribes and pharisees yee shall in no case enter into the kingdome of heauen.
 yee haue heard that it was saide by them of old time thou shalt not kill.
 and whosoeuer shall kill shalbe in danger of the iudgement.
 but i say vnto you that whosoeuer is angry with his brother without a cause shall be in danger of the iudgement.
 and whosoeuer shall say to his brother racha shal be in danger of the counsell.
 but whosoeuer shall say thou foole shalbe in danger of hell fire.
 therefore if thou bring thy gift to the altar and there remembrest that thy brother hath ought against thee.
 leaue there thy gift before the altar and goe thy way first be reconciled to thy brother and then come and offer thy gift.
 agree with thine aduersarie quickly whiles thou art in the way with him.
 least at any time the aduersarie deliuer thee to the iudge and the iudge deliuer thee to the officer and thou be cast into prison.
 uerily i say vnto thee thou shalt by no meanes come out thence till thou hast payd the vttermost farthing.
 yee haue heard that it was said by them of old time thou shalt not commit adulterie.
 but i say vnto you that whosoeuer looketh on a woman to lust after her hath committed adulterie with her already in his heart.
 and if thy right eie offend thee plucke it out and cast it from thee.
 for it is profitable for thee that one of thy members should perish and not that thy whole body should be cast into hell.
 and if thy right hand offend thee cut it off and cast it from thee.
 for it is profitable for thee that one of thy members should perish and not that thy whole body should be cast into hell.
 it hath beene said whosoeuer shall put away his wife let him giue her a writing of diuorcement.
 but i say vnto you that whosoeuer shall put away his wife sauing for the cause of fornication causeth her to commit adultery.
 and whosoeuer shall marie her that is diuorced committeth adulterie.
 againe yee haue heard that it hath beene said by them of old time thou shalt not forsweare thy selfe but shalt performe vnto the lord thine othes.
 but i say vnto you sweare not at all neither by heauen for it is gods throne.
 nor by the earth for it is his footstoole.
 neither by hierusalem for it is the citie of the great king.
 neither shalt thou sweare by thy head because thou canst not make one haire white or blacke.
 but let your communication bee yea yea.
 nay nay.
 for whatsoeuer is more then these commeth of euill.
 yee haue heard that it hath beene said an eie for an eie and a tooth for a tooth.
 but i say vnto you that yee resist not euill.
 but whosoeuer shall smite thee on thy right cheeke turne to him the other also.
 and if any man will sue thee at the law and take away thy coate let him haue thy cloake also.
 and whosoeuer shall compell thee to goe a mile goe with him twaine.
 giue to him that asketh thee.
 and from him that would borrow of thee turne not thou away.
 yee haue heard that it hath beene said thou shalt loue thy neighbour and hate thine enemie.
 but i say vnto you loue your enemies blesse them that curse you doe good to them that hate you and pray for them which despitefully vse you and persecute you.
 that yee may be the children of your father which is in heauen.
 for he maketh his sunne to rise on the euill and on the good and sendeth raine on the iust and on the vniust.
 for if yee loue them which loue you what reward haue yee.
 doe not euen the publicanes the same.
 and if yee salute your brethren only what do you more then others.
 doe not euen the publicanes so.
 be yee therefore perfect euen as your father which is in heauen is perfect.
 take heed that yee doe not your almes before men to bee seene of them.
 otherwise yee haue no reward of your father which is in heauen.
 therefore when thou doest thine almes doe not sound a trumpet before thee as the hypocrites doe in the synagogues and in the streetes that they may haue glory of men.
 uerily i say vnto you they haue their reward.
 but when thou doest almes let not thy left hand know what thy right doeth.
 that thine almes may be in secret.
 and thy father which seeth in secret himselfe shall reward thee openly.
 and when thou prayest thou shalt not be as the hypocrites are.
 for they loue to pray standing in the synagogues and in the corners of the streets that they may be seene of men.
 uerily i say vnto you they haue their reward.
 but thou when thou prayest enter into thy closet and when thou hast shut thy doore pray to thy father which is in secret and thy father which seeth in secret shall reward thee openly.
 but when yee pray vse not vaine repetitions as the heathen doe.
 for they thinke that they shall be heard for their much speaking.
 be not yee therefore like vnto them.
 for your father knoweth what things yee haue neede of before yee aske him.
 after this maner therefore pray yee.
 our father which art in heauen hallowed be thy name.
 thy kingdome come.
 thy will be done in earth as it is in heauen.
 giue vs this day our daily bread.
 and forgiue vs our debts as we forgiue our debters.
 and lead vs not into temptation but deliuer vs from euill.
 for thine is the kingdome and the power and the glory for euer amen.
 for if yee forgiue men their trespasses your heauenly father will also forgiue you.
 but if yee forgiue not men their trespasses neither will your father forgiue your trespasses.
 moreouer when yee fast be not as the hypocrites of a sad countenance.
 for they disfigure their faces that they may appeare vnto men to fast.
 uerily i say vnto you they haue their reward.
 but thou when thou fastest anoint thine head and wash thy face.
 that thou appeare not vnto men to fast but vnto thy father which is in secret.
 and thy father which seeth in secret shall reward thee openly.
 lay not vp for your selues treasures vpon earth where moth and rust doth corrupt and where theeues breake thorow and steale.
 but lay vp for your selues treasures in heauen where neither moth nor rust doth corrupt where theeues doe not breake thorow nor steale.
 for where your treasure is there will your heart be also.
 the light of the body is the eye.
 if therefore thine eye be single thy whole body shalbe full of light.
 but if thine eye be euill thy whole body shall be full of darknesse.
 if therfore the light that is in thee be darkenesse how great is that darkenesse.
 no man can serue two masters.
 for either he will hate the one and loue the other or else hee will holde to the one and despise the other.
 ye cannot serue god and mammon.
 therfore i say vnto you take no thought for your life what yee shall eate or what ye shall drinke nor yet for your body what yee shall put on.
 is not the life more then meate.
 and the body then raiment.
 behold the foules of the aire.
 for they sow not neither do they reape nor gather into barnes yet your heauenly father feedeth them.
 are yee not much better then they.
 which of you by taking thought can adde one cubite vnto his stature.
 and why take ye thought for raiment.
 consider the lillies of the field how they grow.
 they toile not neither doe they spinne.
 and yet i say vnto you that euen solomon in all his glory was not arayed like one of these.
 wherefore if god so clothe the grasse of the field which to day is and to morrow is cast into the ouen.
 shall he not much more clothe you o yee of little faith.
 therefore take no thought saying what shall we eate.
 or what shall we drinke.
 or wherewithall shall wee be clothed.
 for after all these things doe the gentiles seeke.
 for your heauenly father knoweth that ye haue neede of all these things.
 but seeke ye first the kingdome of god and his righteousnesse and all these things shalbe added vnto you.
 take therefore no thought for the morrow.
 for the morrow shall take thought for the things of it selfe.
 sufficient vnto the day is the euill thereof.
 iudge not that ye be not iudged.
 for with what iudgment ye iudge yee shall be iudged.
 and with what measure ye mete it shall be measured to you againe.
 and why beholdest thou the mote that is in thy brothers eye but considerest not the beame that is in thine owne eye.
 or how wilt thou say to thy brother let mee pull out the mote out of thine eye and beholde a beame is in thine owne eye.
 thou hypocrite first cast out the beame out of thine owne eye.
 and then shalt thou see clearely to cast out the mote out of thy brothers eye.
 giue not that which is holy vnto the dogs neither cast ye your pearles before swine.
 lest they trample them vnder their feete and turne againe and rent you.
 aske and it shalbe giuen you.
 seeke and ye shall finde.
 knocke and it shalbe opened vnto you.
 for euery one that asketh receiueth.
 and he that seeketh findeth.
 and to him that knocketh it shalbe opened.
 or what man is there of you whom if his sonne aske bread will hee giue him a stone.
 or if he aske a fish will hee giue him a serpent.
 if ye then being euill know how to giue good giftes vnto your children how much more shall your father which is in heauen giue good things to them that aske him.
 therefore all things whatsoeuer ye would that men should doe to you doe ye euen so to them.
 for this is the law and the prophets.
 enter ye in at the strait gate for wide is the gate and broad is the way that leadeth to destruction and many there be which goe in thereat.
 because strait is the gate and narrow is the way which leadeth vnto life and few there be that finde it.
 beware of false prophets which come to you in sheepes clothing but inwardly they are rauening wolues.
 yee shall knowe them by their fruits.
 doe men gather grapes of thornes or figges of thistles.
 euen so euery good tree bringeth forth good fruit.
 but a corrupt tree bringeth forth euill fruit.
 a good tree cannot bring forth euil fruit neither can a corrupt tree bring forth good fruit.
 euery tree that bringeth not forth good fruit is hewen downe and cast into the fire.
 wherefore by their fruits ye shall know them.
 not euery one that saith vnto me lord lord shall enter into the kingdome of heauen.
 but he that doth the will of my father which is in heauen.
 many will say to me in that day lord lord haue we not prophecied in thy name.
 and in thy name haue cast out deuils.
 and in thy name done many wonderfull works.
 and then wil i professe vnto them i neuer knew you.
 depart from me ye that worke iniquity.
 therefore whosoeuer heareth these sayings of mine and doeth them i wil liken him vnto a wise man which built his house vpon a rocke.
 and the raine descended and the floods came and the windes blew and beat vpon that house.
 and it fell not for it was founded vpon a rocke.
 and euery one that heareth these sayings of mine and doeth them not shall bee likened vnto a foolish man which built his house vpon the sand.
 and the raine descended and the floods came and the windes blew and beat vpon that house and it fell and great was the fall of it.
 and it came to passe when iesus had ended these sayings the people were astonished at his doctrine.
 for he taught them as one hauing authoritie and not as the scribes.
 when he was come downe from the mountaine great multitudes folowed him.
 and behold there came a leper and worshipped him saying lord if thou wilt thou canst make me cleane.
 and iesus put forth his hand and touched him saying i will bee thou cleane.
 and immediately his leprosie was cleansed.
 and iesus saith vnto him see thou tell no man but go thy way shew thy selfe to the priest and offer the gift that moses commanded for a testimonie vnto them.
 and when iesus was entred into capernaum there came vnto him a centurion beseeching him and saying lord my seruant lieth at home sicke of the palsie grieuously tormented.
 and iesus saith vnto him i will come and heale him.
 the centurion answered and said lord i am not worthy that thou shouldest come vnder my roofe.
 but speake the word onely and my seruant shalbe healed.
 for i am a man vnder authority hauing souldiers vnder me.
 and i say to this man goe and he goeth.
 and to another come and he commeth.
 and to my seruant doe this and he doth it.
 when iesus heard it he marueiled and said to them that followed uerely i say vnto you i haue not found so great faith no not in israel.
 and i say vnto you that many shall come from the east and west and shal sit downe with abraham and isaac iacob in the kingdome of heauen.
 but the children of the kingdome shall be cast out into outer darkenesse.
 there shalbe weeping and gnashing of teeth.
 and iesus said vnto the centurion go thy way and as thou hast beleeued so be it done vnto thee.
 and his seruant was healed in the self same houre.
 and when iesus was come into peters house hee saw his wiues mother laid and sicke of a feuer.
 and he touched her hand and the feuer left her.
 and she arose and ministred vnto them.
 when the euen was come they brought vnto him many that were possessed with deuils.
 and hee cast out the spirits with his worde and healed all that were sicke that it might be fulfilled which which was spoken by esaias the prophet saying himselfe tooke our infirmities and bare our sicknesses.
 now when iesus saw great multitudes about him hee gaue commaundement to depart vnto the other side.
 and a certaine scribe came and said vnto him master i will follow thee whithersoeuer thou goest.
 and iesus saith vnto him the foxes haue holes and the birds of the ayre haue nests.
 but the sonne of man hath not where to lay his head.
 and another of his disciples said vnto him lord suffer me first to goe and bury my father.
 but iesus said vnto him follow me let the dead bury their dead.
 and when he was entred into a ship his disciples followed him.
 and behold there arose a great tempest in the sea insomuch that the ship was couered with the waues.
 but he was asleepe.
 and his disciples came to him and awoke saying lord saue vs.
 we perish.
 and he saith vnto them why are yee fearefull o yee of litle faith.
 then hee arose and rebuked the winds and the sea and there was a great calme.
 but the men marueiled saying what maner of man is this that euen the winds and the sea obey him.
 and when hee was come to the other side into the countrey of the gergesenes there met him two possessed with deuils comming out of the tombes exceeding fierce so that no man might passe by that way.
 and behold they cryed out saying what haue we to doe with thee iesus thou sonne of god.
 art thou come hither to torment vs befor the time.
 and there was a good way off from them an heard of many swine feeding.
 so the deuils besought him saying if thou cast vs out suffer vs to goe away into the herd of swine.
 and he said vnto them goe.
 and when they were come out they went into the herd of swine.
 and behold the whole herd of swine ranne violently downe a steepe place into the sea and perished in the waters.
 and they that kept them fled and went their waies into the citie and told euery thing and what was befallen to the possessed of the deuils.
 and behold the whole citie came out to meete iesus.
 and when they saw him they besought him that hee would depart out of their coasts.
 and hee entred into a ship and passed ouer and came into his owne citie.
 and behold they brought to him a man sicke of the palsie lying on a bed.
 and iesus seeing their faith said vnto the sicke of the palsie sonne be of good cheere thy sinnes be forgiuen thee.
 and behold certaine of the scribes said within themselues this man blasphemeth.
 and iesus knowing their thoughts said wherefore thinke yee euill in your hearts.
 for whether is easier to say thy sinnes be forgiuen thee.
 or to say arise and walke.
 but that yee may know that the sonne of man hath power on earth to forgiue sinnes then saith hee to the sicke of the palsie arise take vp thy bed and goe vnto thine house.
 and he arose and departed to his house.
 but when the multitudes saw it they marueiled glorified god which had giuen such power vnto men.
 and as iesus passed forth from thence he saw a man named matthew sitting at the receite of custome.
 and he saith vnto him follow me.
 and he arose and followed him.
 and it came to passe as iesus sate at meate in the house behold many publicanes and sinners came and sate downe with him and his disciples.
 and when the pharisees saw it they said vnto his disciples why eateth your master with publicanes sinners.
 but when iesus heard that hee said vnto them they that be whole neede not a physicion but they that are sicke.
 but goe ye and learne what that meaneth i will haue mercy and not sacrifice.
 for i am not come to call the righteous but sinners to repentance.
 then came to him the disciples of iohn saying why doe we and the pharisees fast oft but thy disciples fast not.
 and iesus saide vnto them can the children of the bridechamber mourne as long as the bridegrome is with them.
 but the dayes will come when the bridegrome shall bee taken from them and then shall they fast.
 no man putteth a piece of new cloth vnto an olde garment.
 for that which is put in to fill it vp taketh from the garment the rent is made worse.
 neither doe men put new wine into old bottels.
 else the bottels breake and the wine runneth out and the bottels perish.
 but they put new wine into new bottels and both are preserued.
 while hee spake these things vnto them beholde there came a certaine ruler and worshipped him saying my daughter is euen now dead.
 but come and lay thy hand vpon her and she shall liue.
 and iesus arose and followed him and so did his disciples.
 and behold a woman which was diseased with an issue of blood twelue yeeres came behinde him and touched the hemme of his garment.
 for she said within her selfe if i may but touch his garment i shall be whole.
 but iesus turned him about and when he saw her he said daughter bee of good comfort thy faith hath made thee whole.
 and the woman was made whole from that houre.
 and when iesus came into the rulers house and saw the minstrels and the people making a noise he said vnto them giue place for the mayd is not dead but sleepeth.
 and they laughed him to scorne.
 but when the people were put foorth he went in and tooke her by the hand.
 and the mayd arose.
 and the fame hereof went abroad into all that land.
 and when iesus departed thence two blinde men followed him crying and saying thou sonne of dauid haue mercy on vs.
 and when he was come into the house the blinde men came to him.
 and iesus saith vnto them beleeue ye that i am able to doe this.
 they said vnto him yea lord.
 then touched he their eyes saying according to your faith bee it vnto you.
 and their eyes were opened.
 and iesus straitly charged them saying see that no man know it.
 but they when they were departed spread abroad his fame in all that countrey.
 as they went out beholde they brought to him a dumbe man possessed with a deuill.
 and when the deuil was cast out the dumbe spake and the multitudes marueiled saying it was neuer so seene in israel.
 but the pharisees said he casteth out the deuils through the prince of the deuils.
 and iesus went about all the cities and villages teaching in their synagogues and preaching the gospel of the kingdome and healing euery sickenesse and euery disease among the people.
 but when he saw the multitudes he was moued with compassion on them because they fainted and were scattered abroad as sheepe hauing no shepheard.
 then saith he vnto his disciples the haruest truely is plenteous but the labourers are few.
 pray ye therefore the lord of the haruest that hee will send foorth labourers into his haruest.
 and when hee had called vnto him his twelue disciples he gaue them power against vncleane spirits to cast them out and to heale all maner of sickenesse and all maner of disease.
 now the names of the twelue apostles are these.
 the first simon who is called peter and andrew his brother iames the sonne of zebedee and iohn his brother.
 philip and bartholomew thomas and matthew the publicane iames the sonne of alpheus and lebbeus whose surname was thaddeus.
 simon the canaanite and iudas iscariot who also betrayed him.
 these twelue iesus sent foorth and commanded them saying goe not into the way of the gentiles and into any city of the samaritans enter ye not.
 but goe rather to the lost sheepe of the house of israel.
 and as yee goe preach saying the kingdome of heauen is at hand.
 heale the sicke cleanse the lepers raise the dead cast out deuils.
 freely ye haue receiued freely giue.
 prouide neither gold nor siluer nor brasse in your purses.
 nor scrippe for your iourney neither two coats neither shooes nor yet staues.
 for the workeman is worthy of his meat.
 and into whatsoeuer city or towne ye shall enter inquire who in it is worthy and there abide till yee goe thence.
 and when ye come into an house salute it.
 and if the house be worthy let your peace come vpon it.
 but if it be not worthy let your peace returne to you.
 and whosoeuer shall not receiue you nor heare your words.
 when yee depart out of that house or city shake off the dust of your feete.
 uerely i say vnto you it shall be more tolerable for the land of sodom and gomorrha in the day of iudgment then for that citie.
 behold i send you foorth as sheepe in the middest of wolues.
 be yee therefore wise as serpents and harmelesse as doues.
 but beware of men.
 for they will deliuer you vp to the councils and they will scourge you in their synagogues and yee shall be brought before gouernours and kings for my sake for a testimonie against them and the gentiles.
 but when they deliuer you vp take no thought how or what ye shall speake for it shall bee giuen you in that same houre what ye shall speake.
 for it is not yee that speake but the spirit of your father which speaketh in you.
 and the brother shall deliuer vp the brother to death and the father the childe.
 and the children shall rise vp against their parents and cause them to be put to death.
 and yee shall be hated of all men for my names sake.
 but he that endureth to the end shalbe saued.
 but when they persecute you in this citie flee ye into another.
 for verely i say vnto you ye shall not haue gone ouer the cities of israel till the sonne of man be come.
 the disciple is not aboue his master nor the seruant aboue his lord.
 it is enough for the disciple that he be as his master and the seruant as his lord.
 if they haue called the master of the house of beelzebub how much more shall they call them of his household.
 feare them not therefore.
 for there is nothing couered that shall not be reueiled.
 and hidde that shall not be knowen.
 what i tell you in darkenesse that speake yee in light.
 and what yee heare in the eare that preach yee vpon the house tops.
 and feare not them which kill the body but are not able to kill the soule.
 but rather feare him which is able to destroy both soule and body in hell.
 are not two sparrowes solde for a farthing.
 and one of them shall not fall on the ground without your father.
 but the very haires of your head are all numbred.
 feare yee not therefore ye are of more value then many sparrowes.
 whosoeuer therefore shall confesse mee before men him will i confesse also before my father which is in heauen.
 but whosoeuer shall deny me before men him will i also deny before my father which is in heauen.
 thinke not that i am come to send peace on earth.
 i came not to send peace but a sword.
 for i am come to set a man at variance against his father the daughter against her mother and the daughter in law against her mother in law.
 and a mans foes shalbe they of his owne houshold.
 he that loueth father or mother more then me is not worthy of me.
 and he that loueth sonne or daughter more then me is not worthy of me.
 and he that taketh not his crosse and followeth after me is not worthy of me.
 he that findeth his life shall lose it.
 and he that loseth his life for my sake shall find it.
 he that receiueth you receiueth me.
 and he that receiueth mee receiueth him that sent me.
 he that receiueth a prophet in the name of a prophet shall receiue a prophets reward.
 and he that receiueth a righteous man in the name of a righteous man shal receiue a righteous mans reward.
 and whosoeuer shall giue to drinke vnto one of these litle ones a cup of cold water onely in the name of a disciple verily i say vnto you hee shall in no wise lose his reward.
 and it came to passe when iesus had made an end of commaunding his twelue disciples hee departed thence to teach and to preach in their cities.
 now when iohn had heard in the prison the workes of christ he sent two of his disciples and said vnto him art thou hee that should come.
 or doe wee looke for another.
 iesus answered and saide vnto them go and shew iohn againe those things which we doe heare and see.
 the blind receiue their sight and the lame walke the lepers are cleansed and the deafe heare the dead are raised vp and the poore haue the gospel preached to them.
 and blessed is he whoseouer shal not be offended in me.
 and as they departed iesus began to say vnto the multitudes concerning iohn what went ye out into the wildernesse to see.
 a reede shaken with the winde.
 but what went ye out for to see.
 a man clothed in soft raiment.
 behold they that weare soft cloathing are in kings houses.
 but what went ye out for to see.
 a prophet.
 yea i say vnto you and more then a prophet.
 for this is he of whom it is written behold i send my messenger before thy face which shall prepare thy way before thee.
 uerely i say vnto you among them that are borne of women there hath not risen a greater then iohn the baptist.
 notwithstanding hee that is least in the kingdome of heauen is greater then he.
 and from the dayes of iohn the baptist vntill now the kingdome of heauen suffereth violence and the violent take it by force.
 for all the prophets and the law prophecied vntill iohn.
 and if ye wil receiue it this is elias which was for to come.
 hee that hath eares to heare let him heare.
 but whereunto shall i liken this generation.
 it is like vnto children sitting in the markets and calling vnto their fellowes and saying we haue piped vnto you and ye haue not danced.
 wee haue mourned vnto you and ye haue not lamented.
 for iohn came neither eating nor drinking and they say he hath a deuill.
 the sonne of man came eating and drinking and they say behold a man gluttonous and a wine bibber a friend of publicanes and sinners.
 but wisedom is iustified of her children.
 then began he to vpbraid the cities wherein most of his mighty works were done because they repented not.
 woe vnto thee chorazin woe vnto thee bethsaida.
 for if the mightie workes which were done in you had bene done in tyre and sidon they would haue repented long agoe in sackcloth and ashes.
 but i say vnto you it shall bee more tolerable for tyre and sidon at the day of iudgement then for you.
 and thou capernaum which art exalted vnto heauen shalt be brought downe to hell.
 for if the mighty works which haue beene done in thee had bin done in sodome it would haue remained vntil this day.
 but i say vnto you that it shall be more tolerable for the land of sodom in the day of iudgment then for thee.
 at that time iesus answered and said i thanke thee o father lord of heauen and earth because thou hast hid these things from the wise prudent hast reueiled them vnto babes.
 euen so father for so it seemed good in thy sight.
 all things are deliuered vnto me of my father.
 and no man knoweth the sonne but the father.
 neither knoweth any man the father saue the sonne and hee to whomsoeuer the sonne will reueile him.
 come vnto me all yee that labour and are heauy laden and i will giue you rest.
 take my yoke vpon you and learne of me for i am meeke and lowly in heart.
 and yee shall find rest vnto your soules.
 for my yoke is easie and my burden is light.
 at that time iesus went on the sabbath day thorow the corne his disciples were an hungred and beganne to pluck the eares of corne and to eate.
 but when the pharises saw it they said vnto him behold thy disciples doe that which is not lawfull to doe vpon the sabbath day.
 but he said vnto them haue yee not read what dauid did when hee was an hungred and they that were with him how he entred into the house of god and did eate the shew bread which was not lawfull for him to eate neither for them which were with him but only for the priests.
 or haue yee not read in the law how that on the sabbath dayes the priests in the temple profane the sabbath and are blamelesse.
 but i saye vnto you that in this place is one greater then the temple.
 but if yee had knowen what this meaneth i will haue mercy and not sacrifice yee would not haue condemned the guiltlesse.
 for the sonne of man is lord euen of the sabbath day.
 and when hee was departed thence he went into their synagogue.
 and behold there was a man which had his hand withered and they asked him saying is it lawfull to heale on the sabbath dayes.
 that they might accuse him.
 and hee said vnto them what man shal there be among you that shall haue one sheepe.
 and if it fall into a pit on the sabbath day will hee not lay hold on it and lift it out.
 how much then is a man better then a shepe.
 wherfore it is lawfull to doe well on the sabbath dayes.
 then saith he to the man stretch forth thine hand.
 and hee stretched it forth and it was restored whole like as the other.
 then the pharises went out and held a counsell against him how they might destroy him.
 but when iesus knew it hee withdrew himselfe from thence.
 and great multitudes followed him and he healed them all and charged them that they should not make him knowen.
 that it might be fulfilled which was spoken by esaias the prophet saying behold my seruant whom i haue chosen my beloued in whom my soule is well pleased.
 i will put my spirit vpon him and he shall shew iudgement to the gentiles.
 he shall not striue nor cry neither shall any man heare his voice in the streets.
 a bruised reed shal he not breake and smoking flaxe shall he not quench till he send forth iudgment vnto victory.
 and in his name shall the gentiles trust.
 then was brought vnto him one possessed with a deuill blinde and dumbe.
 and hee healed him insomuch that the blinde and dumbe both spake and saw.
 and all the people were amazed and said is this the sonne of dauid.
 but when the pharisees heard it they said this fellow doeth not cast out deuils but by beelzebub the prince of the deuils.
 and iesus knew their thoughts and said vnto them euery kingdome diuided against it selfe is brought to desolation.
 and euery citie or house diuided against it selfe shall not stand.
 and if satan cast out satan he is diuided against himselfe.
 how shall then his kingdome stand.
 and if i by beelzebub cast out deuils by whom doe your children cast them out.
 therefore they shall be your iudges.
 but if i cast out deuils by the spirit of god then the kingdome of god is come vnto you.
 or else how can one enter into a strong mans house spoile his goods except hee first binde the strong man and then he will spoile his house.
 he that is not with me is against me.
 and hee that gathereth not with me scattereth abroad.
 wherefore i say vnto you all maner of sinne and blasphemie shall be forgiuen vnto men.
 but the blasphemie against the holy ghost shall not bee forgiuen vnto men.
 and whosoeuer speaketh a word against the sonne of man it shall be forgiuen him.
 but whosoeuer speaketh against the holy ghost it shall not be forgiuen him neither in this world neither in the world to come.
 either make the tree good and his fruit good.
 or else make the tree corrupt and his fruit corrupt.
 for the tree is knowen by his fruit.
 o generation of vipers how can ye being euil speake good things.
 for out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaketh.
 a good man out of the good treasure of the heart bringeth foorth good things.
 and an euill man out of the euill treasure bringeth foorth euill things.
 but i say vnto you that euery idle word that men shall speake they shall giue accompt thereof in the day of iudgement.
 for by thy wordes thou shalt bee iustified and by thy words thou shalt be condemned.
 then certaine of the scribes and of the pharisees answered saying master we would see a signe from thee.
 but hee answered and said to them an euill and adulterous generation seeketh after a signe and there shall no signe be giuen to it but the signe of the prophet ionas.
 for as ionas was three dayes and three nights in the whales belly.
 so shal the sonne of man be three daies and three nights in the heart of the earth.
 the men of nineue shall rise in iudgement with this generation and shall condemne it because they repented at the preaching of ionas and behold a greater then ionas is here.
 the queene of the south shall rise vp in the iudgement with this generation and shall condemne it.
 for she came from the vttermost parts of the earth to heare the wisedome of solomon and behold a greater then solomon is here.
 when the vncleane spirit is gone out of a man hee walketh thorow dry places seeking rest and findeth none.
 then he saith i will returne into my house from whence i came out.
 and when he is come he findeth it emptie swept and garnished.
 then goeth he and taketh with himselfe seuen other spirits more wicked then himselfe and they enter in and dwell there.
 and the last state of that man is worse then the first.
 euen so shal it be also vnto this wicked generation.
 while he yet talked to the people behold his mother and his brethren stood without desiring to speake with him.
 then one saide vnto him behold thy mother and thy brethren stand without desiring to speake with thee.
 but he answered and said vnto him that told him who is my mother.
 and who are my brethren.
 and hee stretched forth his hand toward his disciples and said behold my mother and my brethren.
 for whosoeuer shall doe the will of my father which is in heauen the same is my brother and sister and mother.
 the same day went iesus out of the house and sate by the sea side.
 and great multitudes were gathered together vnto him so that hee went into a ship and sate and the whole multitude stood on the shore.
 and hee spake many things vnto them in parables saying behold a sower went foorth to sow.
 and when he sowed some seedes fell by the wayes side and the foules came and deuoured them vp.
 some fell vpon stony places where they had not much earth.
 and foorth with they sprung vp because they had no deepenesse of earth.
 and when the sunne was vp they were scorched.
 and because they had not root they withered away.
 and some fell among thorns.
 and the thornes sprung vp choked them.
 but other fell into good ground and brought foorth fruit some an hundred folde some sixtie folde some thirty folde.
 who hath eares to heare let him heare.
 and the disciples came and sayd vnto him why speakest thou vnto them in parables.
 he answered and said vnto them because it is giuen vnto you to know the mysteries of the kingdome of heauen but to them it is not giuen.
 for whosoeuer hath to him shall be giuen and he shall haue more abundance.
 but whosoeuer hath not from him shall be taken away euen that hee hath.
 therefore speake i to then in parables.
 because they seeing see not.
 and hearing they heare not neither doe they vnderstand.
 and in them is fulfilled the prophecie of esaias which saith by hearing ye shall heare and shall not vnderstand.
 and seeing yee shall see and shall not perceiue.
 for this peoples heart is waxed grosse and their eares are dull of hearing and their eyes they haue closed lest at any time they should see with their eyes and heare with their eares and should vnderstand with their heart and should be conuerted and i should heale them.
 but blessed are your eyes for they see.
 and your eares for they heare.
 for verely i say vnto you that many prophets and righteous men haue desired to see those things which yee see and haue not seene them.
 and to heare those things which ye heare and haue not heard them.
 heare ye therefore the parable of the sower.
 when any one heareth the word of the kingdome and vnderstandeth it not then commeth the wicked one and catcheth away that which was sowen in his heart.
 this is hee which receiued seede by the way side.
 but he that receiued the seed into stony places the same is he that heareth the word anon with ioy receiueth it.
 yet hath hee not root in himselfe but dureth for a while.
 for when tribulation or persecution ariseth because of the word by and by he is offended.
 he also that receiued seed among the thorns is he that heareth the word and the care of this world and the deceitfulnesse of riches choke the word and he becommeth vnfruitfull.
 but he that receiued seed into the good ground is hee that heareth the word and vnderstandeth it which also beareth fruit and bringeth foorth some an hundred fold some sixtie some thirty.
 another parable put he forth vnto them saying.
 the kingdome of heauen is likened vnto a man which sowed good seed in his field.
 but while men slept his enemy came sowed tares among the wheat and went his way.
 but when the blade was sprung vp and brought forth fruit then appeared the tares also.
 so the seruants of the housholder came and said vnto him sir didst not thou sow good seede in thy field.
 from whence then hath it tares.
 he said vnto them an enemy hath done this.
 the seruants said vnto him wilt thou then that we goe and gather them vp.
 but he said nay.
 lest while yee gather vp the tares ye root vp also the wheat with them.
 let both grow together vntil the haruest.
 and in the time of haruest i will say to the reapers gather ye together first the tares and binde them in bundels to burne them.
 but gather the wheat into my barne.
 another parable put he foorth vnto them saying the kingdome of heauen is like to a graine of mustard seed which a man tooke and sowed in his field.
 which indeed is the least of al seeds.
 but when it is growen it is the greatest among herbes and becommeth a tree.
 so that the birds of the aire come and lodge in the branches thereof.
 another parable spake he vnto them the kingdome of heauen is like vnto leauen which a woman tooke and hid in three measures of meale till the whole was leauened.
 all these things spake iesus vnto the multitude in parables and without a parable spake hee not vnto them.
 that it might bee fulfilled which was spoken by the prophet saying i will open my mouth in parables i wil vtter things which haue bin kept secret from the foundation of the world.
 then iesus sent the multitude away and went into the house.
 and his disciples came vnto him saying declare vnto vs the parable of the tares of the field.
 he answered and said vnto them hee that soweth the good seed is the sonne of man.
 the field is the world.
 the good seed are the children of the kingdome.
 but the tares are the children of the wicked one.
 the enemie that sowed them is the deuill.
 the haruest is the ende of the world.
 and the reapers are the angels.
 as therefore the tares are gathered and burnt in the fire.
 so shall it be in the end of this world.
 the sonne of man shall send forth his angels and they shall gather out of his kingdome all things that offend and them which doe iniquitie.
 and shall cast them into a furnace of fire.
 there shall be wayling and gnashing of teeth.
 then shall the righteous shine foorth as the sunne in the kingdome of their father.
 who hath eares to heare let him heare.
 againe the kingdome of heauen is like vnto treasure hid in a field.
 the which when a man hath found hee hideth and for ioy thereof goeth and selleth all that hee hath and buyeth that field.
 againe the kingdome of heauen is like vnto a marchant man seeking goodly pearles.
 who when hee had found one pearle of great price he went and solde all that he had and bought it.
 againe the kingdome of heauen is like vnto a net that was cast into the sea and gathered of euery kind which when it was full they drew to shore and sate downe and gathered the good into vessels but cast the bad away.
 so shall it be at the ende of the world.
 the angels shal come forth and seuer the wicked from among the iust and shal cast them into the furnace of fire.
 there shall be wailing and gnashing of teeth.
 iesus saith vnto them haue ye vnderstood all these things.
 they say vnto him yea lord.
 then said he vnto them therefore euery scribe which is instructed vnto the kingdom of heauen is like vnto a man that is an housholder which bringeth foorth out of his treasure things new and old.
 and it came to passe that when iesus had finished these parables hee departed thence.
 and when hee was come into his owne countrey he taught them in their synagogue insomuch that they were astonished and said whence hath this man this wisedome and these mighty works.
 is not this the carpenters sonne.
 is not his mother called marie.
 and his brethren iames and ioses and simon and iudas.
 and his sisters are they not all with vs.
 whence then hath this man all these things.
 and they were offended in him.
 but iesus said vnto them a prophet is not without honour saue in his owne countrey and in his owne house.
 and hee did not many mighty workes there because of their vnbeliefe.
 at that time herod the tetrarch heard of the fame of iesus and said vnto his seruants this is iohn the baptist hee is risen from the dead and therfore mighty workes doe shew foorth themselues in him.
 for herode had layd hold on iohn and bound him and put him in prison for herodias sake his brother philips wife.
 for iohn said vnto him it is not lawfull for thee to haue her.
 and when he would haue put him to death hee feared the multitude because they counted him as a prophet.
 but when herods birth day was kept the daughter of herodias daunced before them and pleased herode.
 whereupon he promised with an oath to giue her whatsoeuer she would aske.
 and she being before instructed of her mother said giue me heere iohn baptists head in a charger.
 and the king was sorie.
 neuerthelesse for the othes sake and them which sate with him at meate he commanded it to be giuen her.
 and he sent and beheaded iohn in the prison.
 and his head was brought in a charger and giuen to the damsell.
 and she brought it to her mother.
 and his disciples came and took vp the body and buried it and went and told iesus.
 when iesus heard of it he departed thence by ship into a desert place apart.
 and when the people had heard thereof they followed him on foote out of the cities.
 and iesus went forth and saw a great multitude and was mooued with compassion toward them and he healed their sicke.
 and when it was euening his disciples came to him saying this is a desert place and the time is now past.
 send the multitude away that they may goe into the villages and buy themselues victuals.
 but iesus said vnto them they neede not depart.
 giue yee them to eate.
 and they say vnto him we haue heere but fiue loaues and two fishes.
 he said bring them hither to me.
 and hee commanded the multitude to sit downe on the grasse tooke the fiue loaues and the two fishes and looking vp to heauen hee blessed and brake and gaue the loaues to his disciples and the disciples to the multitude.
 and they did all eat were filled.
 and they tooke vp of the fragments that remained twelue baskets full.
 and they that had eaten were about fiue thousand men beside women and children.
 and straightway iesus constrained his disciples to get into a ship and to goe before him vnto the other side while he sent the multitudes away.
 and when he had sent the multitudes away he went vp into a mountaine apart to pray.
 and when the euening was come he was there alone.
 but the ship was now in the midst of the sea tossed with waues.
 for the wind was contrary.
 and in the fourth watch of the night iesus went vnto them walking on the sea.
 and when the disciples saw him walking on the sea they were troubled saying it is a spirit.
 and they cried out for feare.
 but straightway iesus spake vnto them saying be of good cheere.
 it is i be not afraid.
 and peter answered him and said lord if it be thou bid me come vnto thee on the water.
 and he said come.
 and when peter was come downe out of the ship he walked on the water to go to iesus.
 but when he saw the wind boysterous he was afraid.
 and beginning to sinke he cried saying lord saue me.
 and immediately iesus stretched foorth his hand and caught him and said vnto him o thou of little faith wherefore didst thou doubt.
 and when they were come into the ship the wind ceased.
 then they that were in the ship came and worshipped him saying of a trueth thou art the sonne of god.
 and when they were gone ouer they came into the land of genesaret.
 and when the men of that place had knowledge of him they sent out into all that countrey round about and brought vnto him al that were diseased and besought him that they might onely touch the hemme of his garment.
 and as many as touched were made perfectly whole.
 then came to iesus scribes and pharisees which were of hierusalem saying why do thy disciples transgresse the tradition of the elders.
 for they wash not their handes when they eat bread.
 but hee answered and said vnto them why doe you also transgresse the commandement of god by your tradition.
 for god commaunded saying honour thy father and mother.
 and hee that curseth father or mother let him die the death.
 but yee say whosoeuer shall say to his father or his mother it is a gift by whatsoeuer thou mightest bee profited by me and honour not his father or his mother hee shall be free.
 thus haue yee made the commaundement of god of none effect by your tradition.
 yee hypocrites well did esaias prophecie of you saying this people draweth nigh vnto mee with their mouth and honoureth mee with their lips.
 but their heart is farre from me.
 but in vaine they do worship me teaching for doctrines the commandements of men.
 and he called the multitude and said vnto them heare and vnderstand.
 not that which goeth into the mouth defileth a man.
 but that which commeth out of the mouth this defileth a man.
 then came his disciples and said vnto him knowest thou that the pharisees were offended after they heard this saying.
 but he answered and said euery plant which my heauenly father hath not planted shalbe rooted vp.
 let them alone.
 they be blinde leaders of the blinde.
 and if the blinde lead the blinde both shall fall into the ditch.
 then answered peter and said vnto him declare vnto vs this parable.
 and iesus said are yee also yet without vnderstanding.
 doe not yee yet vnderstand that whatsoeuer entreth in at the mouth goeth into the belly and is cast out into the draught.
 but those things which proceed out of the mouth come forth from the heart and they defile the man.
 for out of the heart proceed euill thoughts murders adulteries fornications thefts false witnes blasphemies.
 these are the things which defile a man.
 but to eate with vnwashen hands defileth not a man.
 then iesus went thence and departed into the coastes of tyre and sidon.
 and behold a woman of canaan came out of the same coasts cried vnto him saying haue mercy on me o lord thou sonne of dauid my daughter is grieuously vexed with a deuill.
 but he answered her not a word.
 and his disciples came and besought him saying send her away for she cryeth after vs.
 but he answered and said i am not sent but vnto the lost sheepe of the house of israel.
 then came she and worshipped him saying lord helpe me.
 but he answered and said it is not meete to take the childrens bread and to cast it to dogs.
 and she said trueth lord.
 yet the dogs eat of the crummes which fall from their masters table.
 then iesus answered and said vnto her o woman great is thy faith.
 be it vnto thee euen as thou wilt.
 and her daughter was made whole from that very houre.
 and iesus departed from thence and came nigh vnto the sea of galile and went vp into a mountaine and sate downe there.
 and great multitudes came vnto him hauing with them those that were lame blinde dumbe maimed and many others and cast them downe at iesus feet and he healed them.
 insomuch that the multitude wondred when they saw the dumbe to speake the maimed to be whole the lame to walke and the blind to see.
 and they glorified the god of israel.
 then iesus called his disciples vnto him and said i haue compassion on the multitude because they continue with me now three dayes and haue nothing to eate.
 and i will not send them away fasting lest they faint in the way.
 and his disciples say vnto him whence should we haue so much bread in the wildernesse as to fill so great a multitude.
 and iesus saith vnto them how many loaues haue yee.
 and they said seuen and a few little fishes.
 and hee commaunded the multitude to sit downe on the ground.
 and he tooke the seuen loaues and the fishes and gaue thankes and brake them and gaue to his disciples and the disciples to the multitude.
 and they did all eate and were filled.
 and they tooke vp of the broken meate that was left seuen baskets full.
 and they that did eat were foure thousand men beside women and children.
 and he sent away the multitude and tooke ship and came into the coasts of magdala.
 the pharises also with the sadduces came and tempting desired him that hee would shew them a signe from heauen.
 he answered and said vnto them when it is euening yee say it will bee faire weather.
 for the skie is red.
 and in the morning it will be foule weather to day.
 for the skie is red and lowring.
 o ye hypocrites yee can discerne the face of the skie but can ye not discerne the signes of the times.
 a wicked and adulterous generation seeketh after a signe and there shall no signe be giuen vnto it but the signe of the prophet ionas.
 and hee left them and departed.
 and when his disciples were come to the other side they had forgotten to take bread.
 then iesus said vnto them take heed and beware of the leauen of the pharises and of the sadduces.
 and they reasoned among themselues saying it is because we haue taken no bread.
 which when iesus perceiued he said vnto them o ye of little faith why reason ye among your selues because ye haue brought no bread.
 doe ye not yet vnderstand neither remember the fiue loaues of the fiue thousand and how many baskets ye tooke vp.
 neither the seuen loaues of the foure thousand and how many baskets ye tooke vp.
 how is it that ye doe not vnderstand that i spake it not to you concerning bread that ye should beware of the leauen of the pharises and of the sadduces.
 then vnderstood they how that he bade them not beware of the leauen of bread.
 but of the doctrine of the pharisees and of the sadduces.
 when iesus came into the coasts of cesarea philippi he asked his disciples saying whom doe men say that i the sonne of man am.
 and they said some say that thou art iohn the baptist some elias and others ieremias or one of the prophets.
 he saith vnto them but whom say ye that i am.
 and simon peter answered and said thou art christ the sonne of the liuing god.
 and iesus answered and said vnto him blessed art thou simon bar iona.
 for flesh and blood hath not reueiled it vnto thee but my father which is in heauen.
 and i say also vnto thee that thou art peter and vpon this rocke i will build my church.
 and the gates of hell shall not preuaile against it.
 and i will giue vnto thee the keyes of the kingdome of heauen.
 and whatsoeuer thou shalt bind on earth shall be bound in heauen.
 whatsoeuer thou shalt loose on earth shall be loosed in heauen.
 then charged hee his disciples that they should tel no man that he was iesus the christ.
 from that time foorth began iesus to shew vnto his disciples how that he must goe vnto hierusalem and suffer many things of the elders and chiefe priests scribes and be killed and be raised againe the third day.
 then peter tooke him and began to rebuke him saying be it farre from thee lord.
 this shal not be vnto thee.
 but he turned and said vnto peter get thee behind mee satan thou art an offence vnto me.
 for thou sauourest not the things that be of god but those that be of men.
 then said iesus vnto his disciples if any man will come after me let him denie himselfe and take vp his crosse and follow me.
 for whosoeuer will saue his life shall lose it.
 and whosoeuer will lose his his life for my sake shall finde it.
 for what is a man profited if hee shal gaine the whole world and lose his owne soule.
 or what shall a man giue in exchange for his soule.
 for the sonne of man shall come in the glory of his father with his angels.
 and then he shall reward euery man according to his works.
 uerely i say vnto you there be some standing here which shall not taste of death till they see the sonne of man comming in his kingdome.
 and after sixe dayes iesus taketh peter iames and iohn his brother and bringeth them vp into an high mountaine apart and was transfigured before them and his face did shine as the sunne and his raiment was white as the light.
 and behold there appeared vnto them moses and elias talking with him.
 then answered peter and saide vnto iesus lord it is good for vs to be here.
 if thou wilt let vs make here three tabernacles.
 one for thee and one for moses and one for elias.
 while he yet spake behold a bright cloud ouershadowed them.
 and behold a voyce out of the cloude which saide this is my beloued sonne in whom i am well pleased.
 heare ye him.
 and when the disciples heard it they fell on their face and were sore afraid.
 and iesus came and touched them and said arise and be not afraid.
 and when they had lift vp their eyes they saw no man saue iesus only.
 and as they came downe from the mountaine iesus charged them saying tell the vision to no man vntil the sonne of man bee risen againe from the dead.
 and his disciples asked him saying why then say the scribes that elias must first come.
 and iesus answered and said vnto them elias truely shall first come and restore all things.
 but i say vnto you that elias is come already and they knew him not but haue done vnto him whatsoeuer they listed.
 likewise shall also the son of man suffer of them.
 then the disciples vnderstood that he spake vnto them of iohn the baptist.
 and when they were come to the multitude there came to him a certaine man kneeling downe to him and saying lord haue mercie on my sonne for he is lunatike and sore vexed.
 for oft times he falleth into the fire and oft into the water.
 and i brought him to thy disciples and they could not cure him.
 then iesus answered and said o faithlesse and peruerse generation how long shall i bee with you.
 howe long shal i suffer you.
 bring him hither to me.
 and iesus rebuked the deuill and hee departed out of him.
 and the childe was cured from that very houre.
 then came the disciples to iesus apart and said why could not we cast him out.
 and iesus said vnto them because of your vnbeliefe.
 for verily i say vnto you if yee haue faith as a graine of mustard seed yee shall say vnto this mountaine.
 remoue hence to yonder place.
 and it shall remoue and nothing shall be vnpossible vnto you.
 howbeit this kind goeth not out but by prayer and fasting.
 and while they abode in galilee iesus said vnto them the sonne of man shall be betraied into the hands of men.
 and they shall kill him and the third day he shall be raised againe.
 and they were exceeding sorie.
 and when they were come to capernaum they that receiued tribute money came to peter and said doeth not your master pay tribute.
 hee saith yes.
 and when hee was come into the house iesus preuented him saying what thinkest thou simon.
 of whom doe the kings of the earth take custome or tribute.
 of their owne children or of strangers.
 peter saith vnto him of strangers.
 iesus saith vnto him then are the children free.
 notwithstanding least we should offend them goe thou to the sea and cast an hooke and take vp the fish that first commeth vp.
 and when thou hast opened his mouth thou shalt find a piece of money.
 that take and giue vnto them for me and thee.
 at the same time came the disciples vnto iesus saying who is the greatest in the kingdome of heauen.
 and iesus called a little child vnto him and set him in the midst of them and said uerily i say vnto you except yee be conuerted and become as little children yee shall not enter into the kingdome of heauen.
 whosoeuer therefore shall humble himselfe as this little childe the same is greatest in the kingdome of heauen.
 and who so shall receiue one such little child in my name receiueth me.
 but who so shall offend one of these little ones which beleeue in me it were better for him that a milstone were hanged about his necke and that hee were drowned in the depth of the sea.
 woe vnto the world because of offences.
 for it must needs be that offences come.
 but wo to that man by whom the offence commeth.
 wherefore if thy hand or thy foote offend thee cut them off and cast them from thee.
 it is better for thee to enter into life halt or maimed rather then hauing two hands or two feete to be cast into euerlasting fire.
 and if thine eie offend thee plucke it out and cast it from thee.
 it is better for thee to enter into life with one eie rather then hauing two eies to be cast into hell fire.
 take heed that yee despise not one of these little ones.
 for i say vnto you that in heauen their angels do alwaies behold the face of my father which is in heauen.
 for the sonne of man is come to saue that which was lost.
 how thinke yee.
 if a man haue an hundred sheepe and one of them be gone astray doth he not leaue the ninetie and nine and goeth into the mountaines and seeketh that which is gone astray.
 and if so be that he find it uerily i say vnto you hee reioyceth more of that sheepe then of the ninetie and nine which went not astray.
 euen so it is not the will of your father which is in heauen that one of these little ones should perish.
 moreouer if thy brother shall trespasse against thee goe and tell him his fault betweene thee and him alone.
 if he shall heare thee thou hast gained thy brother.
 but if he will not heare thee then take with thee one or two more that in the mouth of two or three witnesses euery word may be established.
 and if hee shall neglect to heare them tell it vnto the church.
 but if he neglect to heare the church let him be vnto thee as an heathen man and a publicane.
 uerily i say vnto you whatsoeuer ye shall binde on earth shall bee bound in heauen.
 and whatsoeuer yee shall loose on earth shall bee loosed in heauen.
 againe i say vnto you that if two of you shall agree on earth as touching any thing that they shall aske it shall bee done for them of my father which is in heauen.
 for where two or three are gathered together in my name there am i in the midst of them.
 then came peter to him and said lord how oft shall my brother sinne against mee and i forgiue him.
 till seuen times.
 iesus saith vnto him i say not vnto thee untill seuen times.
 but untill seuentie times seuen.
 therefore is the kingdome of heauen likened vnto a certaine king which would take accompt of his seruants.
 and when hee had begun to reckon one was brought vnto him which ought him ten thousand talents.
 but forasmuch as hee had not to pay his lord commanded him to bee sold and his wife and children and all that he had and payment to be made.
 the seruant therfore fell downe and worshipped him saying lord haue patience with mee and i will pay thee all.
 then the lord of that seruant was moued with compassion and loosed him and forgaue him the debt.
 but the same seruant went out and found one of his fellowseruants which ought him an hundred pence.
 and hee layd handes on him and tooke him by the throte saying pay mee that thou owest.
 and his fellow seruant fell downe at his feete and besought him saying haue patience with me and i will pay thee all.
 and he would not.
 but went and cast him into prison till hee should pay the debt.
 so when his fellowseruants saw what was done they were very sorie and came and told vnto their lord all that was done.
 then his lord after that hee had called him said vnto him o thou wicked seruant i forgaue thee all that debt because thou desiredst me.
 shouldest not thou also haue had compassion on thy fellowseruant euen as i had pitie on thee.
 and his lord was wroth and deliuered him to the tormentors till hee should pay all that was due vnto him.
 so likewise shall my heauenly father doe also vnto you if yee from your hearts forgiue not euery one his brother their trespasses.
 and it came to passe that when iesus had finished these sayings he departed from galilee and came into the coastes of iudea beyond iordane.
 and great multitudes followed him and he healed them there.
 the pharisees also came vnto him tempting him and saying vnto him is it lawfull for a man to put away his wife for euery cause.
 and hee answered and said vnto them haue ye not read that he which made them at the beginning made them male and female.
 and said for this cause shall a man leaue father and mother and shall cleaue to his wife.
 and they twaine shalbe one flesh.
 wherefore they are no more twaine but one flesh.
 what therefore god hath ioyned together let not man put asunder.
 they say vnto him why did moses then command to giue a writing of diuorcement and to put her away.
 hee saith vnto them moses because of the hardnesse of your hearts suffered you to put away your wiues.
 but from the beginning it was not so.
 and i say vnto you whosoeuer shall put away his wife except it be for fornication and shall marry another committeth adultery.
 and whoso marrieth her which is put away doth commit adultery.
 his disciples say vnto him if the case of the man be so with his wife it is not good to marrie.
 but hee said vnto them all men cannot receiue this saying saue they to whom it is giuen.
 for there are some eunuches which were so borne from their mothers wombe.
 and there are some eunuches which were made eunuches of men.
 and there be eunuches which haue made themselues eunuches for the kingdome of heauens sake.
 he that is able to receiue it let him receiue it.
 then were there brought vnto him little children that he should put his hands on them and pray.
 and the disciples rebuked them.
 but iesus said suffer little children and forbid them not to come vnto me.
 for of such is the kingdome of heauen.
 and he laide his hands on them and departed thence.
 and behold one came and said vnto him good master what good thing shall i do that i may haue eternall life.
 and he said vnto him why callest thou me good.
 there is none good but one that is god.
 but if thou wilt enter into life keep the commandements.
 he saith vnto him which.
 iesus said thou shalt do no murder thou shalt not commit adultery thou shalt not steale thou shalt not beare false witnesse honour thy father and thy mother.
 and thou shalt loue thy neighbour as thy selfe.
 the young man saith vnto him all these things haue i kept from my youth vp.
 what lacke i yet.
 iesus said vnto him if thou wilt be perfect goe and sell that thou hast and giue to the poore and thou shalt haue treasure in heauen.
 and come and follow me.
 but when the young man heard that saying he went away sorrowfull.
 for he had great possessions.
 then said iesus vnto his disciples uerely i say vnto you that a rich man shall hardly enter into the kingdome of heauen.
 and againe i say vnto you it is easier for a camel to goe thorow the eye of a needle then for a rich man to enter into the kingdome of god.
 when his disciples heard it they were exceedingly amazed saying who then can be saued.
 but iesus beheld them and said vnto them with men this is vnpossible but with god al things are possible.
 then answered peter and said vnto him behold we haue forsaken all and followed thee what shall we haue therefore.
 and iesus said vnto them uerily i say vnto you that ye which haue followed me in the regeneration when the sonne of man shal sit in the throne of his glory ye also shal sit vpon twelue thrones iudging the twelue tribes of israel.
 and euery one that hath forsaken houses or brethren or sisters or father or mother or wife or children or lands for my names sake shall receiue an hundred fold and shall inherite euerlasting life.
 but many that are first shall be last and the last shall be first.
 for the kingdome of heauen is like vnto a man that is an housholder which went out early in the morning to hire labourers into his vineyard.
 and when hee had agreed with the labourers for a peny a day he sent them into his vineyard.
 and he went out about the third houre and saw others standing idle in the market place and said vnto them go ye also into the vineyard whatsoeuer is right i wil giue you.
 and they went their way.
 againe he went out about the sixth and ninth houre and did likewise.
 and about the eleuenth houre he went out and found others standing idle and saith vnto them why stand ye here all the day idle.
 they say vnto him because no man hath hired vs.
 he saith vnto them go ye also into the vineyard.
 and whatsoeuer is right that shall ye receiue.
 so when euen was come the lord of the vineyard saith vnto his steward call the labourers and giue them their hire beginning from the last vnto the first.
 and when they came that were hired about the eleuenth houre they receiued euery man a penie.
 but when the first came they supposed that they should haue receiued more and they likewise receiued euery man a penie.
 and when they had receiued it they murmured against the good man of the house saying these last haue wrought but one houre and thou hast made them equall vnto vs which haue borne the burden and heat of the day.
 but he answered one of them and said friend i do thee no wrong.
 didst not thou agree with me for a penie.
 take that thine is and goe thy way i will giue vnto this last euen as vnto thee.
 is it not lawfull for mee to doe what i wil with mine owne.
 is thine eye euill because i am good.
 so the last shall be first and the first last.
 for many bee called but fewe chosen.
 and iesus going vp to hierusalem tooke the twelue disciples apart in the way and said vnto them behold we goe vp to hierusalem and the sonne of man shall be betraied vnto the chiefe priests and vnto the scribes and they shall condemne him to death and shal deliuer him to the gentiles to mocke and to scourge and to crucifie him.
 and the third day he shall rise againe.
 then came to him the mother of zebedees children with her sonnes worshipping him and desiring a certain thing of him.
 and he said vnto her what wilt thou.
 she saith vnto him grant that these my two sonnes may sit the one on thy right hand and the other on the left in thy kingdome.
 but iesus answered and said ye know not what ye aske.
 are ye able to drinke of the cup that i shall drinke of and to be baptized with the baptisme that i am baptized with.
 they say vnto him we are able.
 and he saith vnto them yee shall drinke indeed of my cup and be baptized with the baptisme that i am baptized with.
 but to sit on my right hand and on my left is not mine to giue but it shall be giuen to them for whom it is prepared of my father.
 and when the ten heard it they were moued with indignation against the two brethren.
 but iesus called them vnto him and said ye know that the princes of the gentiles exercise dominion ouer them and they that are great exercise authoritie vpon them.
 but it shall not be so among you.
 but whosoeuer will bee great among you let him be your minister.
 and whosoeuer will be chiefe among you let him be your seruant.
 euen as the sonne of man came not to be ministred vnto but minister and to giue his life a ransome for many.
 and as they departed from hiericho a great multitude followed him.
 and behold two blind men sitting by the way side when they heard that iesus passed by cried out saying haue mercie on vs o lord thou sonne of dauid.
 and the multitude rebuked them because they should holde their peace.
 but they cried the more saying haue mercie on vs o lord thou sonne of dauid.
 and iesus stood still and called them and saide what will yee that i shall doe vnto you.
 they say vnto him lord that our eyes may be opened.
 so iesus had compassion on them and touched their eyes.
 and immediatly their eyes receiued sight and they followed him.
 and when they drewe nigh vnto hierusalem and were come to bethphage vnto the mount of oliues then sent iesus two disciples saying vnto them goe into the village ouer against you and straightway yee shall find an asse tied and a colt with her.
 loose them and bring them vnto me.
 and if any man say ought vnto you yee shall say the lord hath need of them and straightway hee will send them.
 all this was done that it might be fulfilled which was spoken by the prophet saying tell yee the daughter of sion behold thy king commeth vnto thee meeke and sitting vpon an asse and a colt the foale of an asse.
 and the disciples went and did as iesus commanded them and brought the asse and the colt and put on them their clothes and they set him thereon.
 and a very great multitude spread their garments in the way others cut downe branches from the trees and strawed them in the way.
 and the multitudes that went before and that followed cried saying hosanna to the sonne of dauid.
 blessed is he that commeth in the name of the lord hosanna in the highest.
 and when hee was come into hierusalem all the citie was mooued saying who is this.
 and the multitude said this is iesus the prophet of nazareth of galilee.
 and iesus went into the temple of god and cast out all them that sold and bought in the temple and ouerthrew the tables of the money changers and the seats of them that solde doues and said vnto them it is written my house shall be called the house of prayer but yee haue made it a denne of theeues.
 and the blind and the lame came to him in the temple he healed them.
 and when the chiefe priests and scribes saw the wonderfull things that he did the children crying in the temple saying hosanna to the sonne of dauid they were sore displeased and said vnto him hearest thou what these say.
 and iesus saith vnto them yea haue yee neuer read out of the mouth of babes and sucklings thou hast perfected praise.
 and he left them and went out of the citie into bethany and he lodged there.
 now in the morning as hee returned into the citie he hungred.
 and when he saw a figge tree in the way hee came to it and found nothing thereon but leaues only and said vnto it let no fruite growe on thee hence forward for euer.
 and presently the figge tree withered away.
 and when the disciples saw it they marueiled saying how soone is the figge tree withered away.
 iesus answered and said vnto them uerily i say vnto you if yee haue faith and doubt not yee shall not onely doe this which is done to the figge tree but also if ye shall say vnto this mountaine be thou remoued and be thou cast into the sea it shall be done.
 and all things whatsoeuer yee shall aske in prayer beleeuing ye shall receiue.
 and when he was come into the temple the chiefe priests and the elders of the people came vnto him as he was teaching and said by what authoritie doest thou these things.
 and who gaue thee this authoritie.
 and iesus answered and said vnto them i also will aske you one thing which if ye tell me i in like wise will tell you by what authoritie i doe these things.
 the baptisme of iohn whence was it.
 from heauen or of men.
 and they reasoned with themselues saying if we shall say from heauen hee will say vnto vs why did ye not then beleeue him.
 but if we shall say of men we feare the people for all hold iohn as a prophet.
 and they answered iesus and said we cannot tell.
 and he said vnto them neither tell i you by what authoritie i doe these things.
 but what thinke you.
 a certaine man had two sonnes and he came to the first and said sonne goe worke to day in my vineyard.
 he answered said i will not.
 but afterward he repented and went.
 and hee came to the second and said likewise.
 and hee answered and said i goe sir and went not.
 whether of them twaine did the will of his father.
 they say vnto him the first.
 iesus saith vnto them uerely i say vnto you that the publicanes and the harlots go into the kingdome of god before you.
 for iohn came vnto you in the way of righteousnesse and ye beleeued him not.
 but the publicanes and the harlots beleeued him.
 and ye when ye had seene it repented not afterward that ye might beleeue him.
 heare another parable.
 there was a certaine householder which planted a uineyard and hedged it round about and digged a winepresse in it and built a tower and let it out to husbandmen and went into a farre countrey.
 and when the time of the fruite drew neere he sent his seruants to the husbandmen that they might receiue the fruits of it.
 and the husbandmen tooke his seruants and beat one and killed another and stoned another.
 againe hee sent other seruants moe then the first and they did vnto them likewise.
 but last of all he sent vnto them his sonne saying they will reuerence my sonne.
 but when the husbandmen saw the sonne they said among themselues this is the heire come let vs kill him and let vs sease on his inheritance.
 and they caught him and cast him out of the uineyard and slew him.
 when the lord therefore of the uineyard commeth what will he doe vnto those husbandmen.
 they say vnto him he will miserably destroy those wicked men and will let out his uineyard vnto other husbandmen which shall render him the fruits in their seasons.
 iesus saith vnto them did ye neuer reade in the scriptures the stone which the builders reiected the same is become the head of the corner.
 this is the lords doing and it is marueilous in our eyes.
 therefore say i vnto you the kingdome of god shall be taken from you and giuen to a nation bringing forth the fruits thereof.
 and whosoeuer shall fall on this stone shalbe broken.
 but on whom soeuer it shall fall it will grinde him to powder.
 and when the chiefe priests and pharisees had heard his parables they perceiued that he spake of them.
 but when they sought to lay hands on him they feared the multitude because they tooke him for a prophet.
 and iesus answered and spake vnto them againe by parables and said the kingdome of heauen is like vnto a certaine king which made a marriage for his sonne and sent forth his seruants to call them that were bidden to the wedding and they would not come.
 againe hee sent foorth other seruants saying tell them which are bidden beholde i haue prepared my dinner.
 my oxen and my fatlings are killed and all things are ready.
 come vnto the marriage.
 but they made light of it and went their wayes one to his farme another to his merchandize.
 and the remnant tooke his seruants and intreated them spitefully and slew them.
 but when the king heard thereof he was wroth and hee sent foorth his armies and destroyed those murderers and burnt vp their citie.
 then saith hee to his seruants the wedding is ready but they which were bidden were not worthy.
 goe yee therefore into the high wayes and as many as yee shall finde bid to the marriage.
 so those seruants went out into the high wayes and gathered together all as many as they found both bad and good and the wedding was furnished with ghests.
 and when the king came in to see the guests hee sawe there a man which had not on a wedding garment and hee sayth vnto him friend how camest thou in hither not hauing a wedding garment.
 and hee was speechlesse.
 then said the king to the seruants binde him hand and foot and take him away and cast him into outer darkenesse there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth.
 for many are called but few are chosen.
 then went the pharises and tooke counsell how they might intangle him in his talke.
 and they sent out vnto him their disciples with the herodians saying master wee know that thou art true and teachest the way of god in trueth neither carest thou for any man.
 for thou regardest not the person of men.
 tell vs therefore what thinkest thou.
 is it lawfull to giue tribute vnto cesar or not.
 but iesus perceiued their wickednesse and said why tempt ye me ye hypocrites.
 shew me the tribute money.
 and they brought vnto him a peny.
 and he sayth vnto them whose is this image and superscription.
 they say vnto him cesars.
 then sayth he vnto them render therefore vnto cesar the things which are cesars.
 and vnto god the things that are gods.
 when they had heard these wordes they marueiled and left him and went their way.
 the same day came to him the sadduces which say that there is no resurrection and asked him saying master moses said if a man die hauing no children his brother shall marrie his wife and raise vp seed vnto his brother.
 now there were with vs seuen brethren and the first when he had maried a wife deceased and hauing no issue left his wife vnto his brother.
 likewise the second also and the third vnto the seuenth.
 and last of al the woman died also.
 therefore in the resurrection whose wife shall she be of the seuen.
 for they all had her.
 iesus answered and said vnto them yee doe erre not knowing the scriptures nor the power of god.
 for in the resurrection they neither marry nor are giuen in marriage but are as the angels of god in heauen.
 but as touching the resurrection of the dead haue ye not read that which was spoken vnto you by god saying i am the god of abraham and the god of isaac and the god of iacob.
 god is not the god of the dead but of the liuing.
 and when the multitude heard this they were astonished at his doctrine.
 but when the pharises had heard that he had put the sadduces to silence they were gathered together.
 then one of them which was a lawyer asked him a question tempting him and saying master which is the great commandement in the law.
 iesus sayd vnto him thou shalt loue the lord thy god with all thy heart and with all thy soule and with all thy minde.
 this is the first and great commandement.
 and the second is like vnto it thou shalt loue thy neighbour as thy selfe.
 on these two commandements hang all the law and the prophets.
 while the pharises were gathered together iesus asked them saying what thinke yee of christ.
 whose sonne is hee.
 they say vnto him the sonne of dauid.
 he saith vnto them how then doth dauid in spirit call him lord saying the lord said vnto my lord sit thou on my right hand till i make thine enemies thy footstoole.
 if dauid then call him lord how is he his sonne.
 and no man was able to answere him a word neither durst any man from that day foorth aske him any moe questions.
 then spake iesus to the multitude and to his disciples saying the scribes and the pharises sit in moses seate.
 all therefore whatsoeuer they bid you obserue that obserue and doe but doe not ye after their workes.
 for they say and doe not.
 for they binde heauie burdens and grieuous to be borne and lay them on mens shoulders but they themselues will not mooue them with one of their fingers.
 but all their workes they doe for to be seene of men.
 they make broad their phylacteries and enlarge the borders of their garments and loue the vppermost roomes at feasts and the chiefe seats in the synagogues and greetings in the markets and to be called of men rabbi rabbi.
 but be not ye called rabbi.
 for one is your master euen christ and all ye are brethren.
 and call no man your father vpon the earth.
 for one is your father which is in heauen.
 neither be ye called masters.
 for one is your master euen christ.
 but hee that is greatest among you shall be your seruant.
 and whosoeuer shall exalt himselfe shall be abased.
 and he that shall humble himselfe shall be exalted.
 but woe vnto you scribes and pharisees hypocrites.
 for yee shut vp the kingdom of heauen against men.
 for yee neither goe in your selues neither suffer ye them that are entring to goe in.
 woe vnto you scribes and pharisees hypocrites.
 for yee deuoure widowes houses and for a pretence make long prayer.
 therefore ye shall receiue the greater damnation.
 woe vnto you scribes and pharises hypocrites.
 for yee compasse sea and land to make one proselyte and when hee is made yee make him two fold more the childe of hell then your selues.
 woe vnto you yee blind guides which say whosoeuer shall sweare by the temple it is nothing.
 but whosoeuer shal sweare by the gold of the temple he is a debter.
 ye fooles and blind.
 for whether is greater the gold or the temple that sanctifieth the gold.
 and whosoeuer shall sweare by the altar it is nothing.
 but whosoeuer sweareth by the gift that is vpon it he is guiltie.
 ye fooles and blind.
 for whether is greater the gift or the altar that sanctifieth the gift.
 who so therefore shall sweare by the altar sweareth by it and by all things thereon.
 and who so shall sweare by the temple sweareth by it and by him that dwelleth therein.
 and he that shall sweare by heauen sweareth by the throne of god and by him that sitteth thereon.
 woe vnto you scribes and pharisees hypocrites.
 for yee pay tithe of mint and annise and cummine and haue omitted the weightier matters of the law iudgement mercie and faith.
 these ought ye to haue done and not to leaue the other vndone.
 ye blind guides which straine at a gnat and swallow a camel.
 woe vnto you scribes and pharisees hypocrites.
 for yee make cleane the outside of the cup and of the platter but within they are full of extortion and excesse.
 thou blind pharisee cleanse first that which is within the cup and platter that the outside of them may bee cleane also.
 woe vnto you scribes and pharisees hypocrites for yee are like vnto whited sepulchres which indeed appeare beautifull outward but are within full of dead mens bones and of all vncleannesse.
 euen so yee also outwardly appeare righteous vnto men but within ye are full of hypocrisie and iniquitie.
 woe vnto you scribes and pharisees hypocrites because ye build the tombes of the prophets and garnish the sepulchres of the righteous and say if wee had beene in the dayes of our fathers wee would not haue bene partakers with them in the blood of the prophets.
 wherefore ye bee witnesses vnto your selues that yee are the children of them which killed the prophets.
 fil ye vp then the measure of your fathers.
 yee serpents yee generation of vipers how can yee escape the damnation of hell.
 wherefore behold i send vnto you prophets and wisemen and scribes and some of them yee shall kill and crucifie and some of them shall yee scourge in your synagogues and persecute them from citie to citie.
 that vpon you may come all the righteous blood shed vpon the earth from the blood of righteous abel vnto the blood of zacharias sonne of barachias whom yee slew betweene the temple and the altar.
 uerily i say vnto you all these things shal come vpon this generation.
 o hierusalem hierusalem thou that killest the prophets and stonest them which are sent vnto thee how often would i haue gathered thy children together euen as a hen gathereth her chickens vnder her wings and yee would not.
 behold your house is left vnto you desolate.
 for i say vnto you yee shall not see me henceforth till ye shall say blessed is he that commeth in the name of the lord.
 and iesus went out and departed from the temple and his disciples came to him for to shew him the buildings of the temple.
 and iesus said vnto them see yee not all these things.
 uerily i say vnto you there shall not be left heere one stone vpon another that shall not be throwen downe.
 and as he sate vpon the mount of oliues the disciples came vnto him priuately saying tell vs when shall these things be.
 and what shall be the signe of thy coming and of the end of the world.
 and iesus answered and said vnto them take heed that no man deceiue you.
 for many shall come in my name saying i am christ.
 and shall deceiue many.
 and yee shall heare of warres and rumors of warres.
 see that yee be not troubled.
 for all these things must come to passe but the end is not yet.
 for nation shall rise against nation and kingdome against kingdome and there shall be famines and pestilences and earthquakes in diuers places.
 all these are the beginning of sorrowes.
 then shall they deliuer you vp to be afflicted and shall kill you.
 and yee shall bee hated of all nations for my names sake.
 and then shall many be offended and shall betray one another and shall hate one another.
 and many false prophets shall rise and shall deceiue many.
 and because iniquitie shal abound the loue of many shall waxe cold.
 but he that shall endure vnto the end the same shall be saued.
 and this gospell of the kingdome shall be preached in all the world for a witnesse vnto al nations and then shall the end come.
 when yee therefore shall see the abomination of desolation spoken of by daniel the prophet stand in the holy place who so readeth let him vnderstand.
 then let them which be in iudea flee into the mountaines.
 let him which is on the house top not come downe to take any thing out of his house.
 neither let him which is in the field returne backe to take his clothes.
 and woe vnto them that are with child and to them that giue sucke in those dayes.
 but pray yee that your flight bee not in the winter neither on the sabbath day.
 for then shall be great tribulation such as was not since the beginning of the world to this time no nor euer shall be.
 and except those dayes should be shortned there should no flesh be saued.
 but for the elects sake those dayes shall be shortned.
 then if any man shall say vnto you loe heere is christ or there.
 beleeue it not.
 for there shall arise false christs and false prophets and shal shew great signes and wonders.
 insomuch that if it were possible they shall deceiue the very elect.
 behold i haue told you before.
 wherefore if they shall say vnto you behold he is in the desert goe not foorth.
 behold he is in the secret chambers beleeue it not.
 for as the lightening commeth out of the east and shineth euen vnto the west.
 so shall also the coming of the sonne of man be.
 for wheresoeuer the carkeise is there will the eagles bee gathered together.
 immediately after the tribulation of those dayes shall the sunne be darkned and the moone shall not giue her light and the starres shall fall from heauen and the powers of the heauens shall be shaken.
 and then shall appeare the signe of the sonne of man in heauen.
 and then shall all the tribes of the earth mourne and they shall see the sonne of man coming in the clouds of heauen with power and great glory.
 and hee shall send his angels with a great sound of a trumpet and they shall gather together his elect from the foure windes from one end of heauen to the other.
 now learne a parable of the figtree.
 when his branch is yet tender and putteth foorth leaues yee know that summer is nigh.
 so likewise yee when ye shall see all these things know that it is neere euen at the doores.
 uerely i say vnto you this generation shall not passe till all these things be fulfilled.
 heauen and earth shall passe away but my wordes shall not passe away.
 but of that day and houre knoweth no man no not the angels of heauen but my father onely.
 but as the dayes of noe were so shall also the comming of the sonne of man be.
 for as in the dayes that were before the flood they were eating and drinking marrying and giuing in mariage vntill the day that noe entred into the arke and knew not vntill the flood came and tooke them all away.
 so shall also the comming of the sonne of man be.
 then shall two be in the field the one shalbe taken and the other left.
 two women shall be grinding at the mill.
 the one shall be taken and the other left.
 watch therfore for ye know not what houre your lord doth come.
 but know this that if the good man of the house had knowen in what watch the thiefe would come he would haue watched and would not haue suffered his house to be broken vp.
 therefore be yee also ready.
 for in such an houre as you thinke not the sonne of man commeth.
 who then is a faithfull and wise seruant whom his lord hath made ruler ouer his houshold to giue them meat in due season.
 blessed is that seruant whome his lord when he commeth shall finde so doing.
 uerely i say vnto you that hee shal make him ruler ouer all his goods.
 but and if that euill seruant shal say in his heart my lord delayeth his comming and shall begin to smite his fellow seruants and to eate and drinke with the drunken.
 the lord of that seruant shall come in a day when hee looketh not for him and in an houre that hee is not ware of.
 and shall cut him asunder and appoint him his portion with the hypocrites.
 there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth.
 then shall the kingdome of heauen be likened vnto ten uirgins which tooke their lamps went forth to meet the bridegrome.
 and fiue of them were wise and fiue were foolish.
 they that were foolish tooke their lampes and tooke no oyle with them.
 but the wise tooke oyle in their vessels with their lampes.
 while the bridegrome taried they all slumbred and slept.
 and at midnight there was a cry made behold the bridegrome commeth goe ye out to meet him.
 then all those virgins arose and trimmed their lampes.
 and the foolish said vnto the wise giue vs of your oyle for our lampes are gone out.
 but the wise answered saying not so lest there be not ynough for vs and you but goe ye rather to them that sell and buy for your selues.
 and while they went to buy the bridegrome came and they that were ready went in with him to the marriage and the doore was shut.
 afterward came also the other virgines saying lord lord open to vs.
 but he answered and said uerely i say vnto you i know you not.
 watch therefore for ye know neither the day nor the houre wherein the sonne of man commeth.
 for the kingdome of heauen is as a man trauailing into a farre countrey who called his owne seruants and deliuered vnto them his goods.
 and vnto one he gaue fiue talents to another two and to another one to euery man according to his seuerall ability straightway tooke his iourney.
 then hee that had receiued the fiue talents went and traded with the same and made them other fiue talents.
 and likewise he that had receiued two he also gained other two.
 but hee that had receiued one went and digged in the earth and hid his lordes money.
 after a long time the lord of those seruants commeth and reckoneth with them.
 and so hee that had receiued fiue talents came and brought other fiue talents saying lord thou deliueredst vnto me fiue talents behold i haue gained besides them fiue talents moe.
 his lord said vnto him well done thou good and faithfull seruant thou hast been faithfull ouer a few things i wil make thee ruler ouer many things.
 enter thou into the ioy of thy lord.
 he also that had receiued two talents came and said lord thou deliueredst vnto me two talents.
 behold i haue gained two other talents besides them.
 his lord said vnto him well done good and faithfull seruant thou hast beene faithfull ouer a few things i wil make thee ruler ouer many things.
 enter thou into the ioy of thy lord.
 then he which had receiued the one talent came said lord i knew thee that thou art an hard man reaping where thou hast not sowen gathering where thou hast not strawed.
 and i was afraid and went and hidde thy talent in the earth.
 loe there thou hast that is thine.
 his lord answered and said vnto him thou wicked and slouthfull seruant thou knewest that i reape where i sowed not and gather where i haue not strawed.
 thou oughtest therefore to haue put my money to the exchangers and then at my comming i should haue receiued mine owne with vsurie.
 take therefore the talent from him and giue it vnto him which hath ten talents.
 for vnto euery one that hath shall be giuen and he shall haue abundance.
 but from him that hath not shal be taken away euen that which he hath.
 and cast yee the vnprofitable seruant into outer darkenesse there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth.
 when the sonne of man shall come in his glory and all the holy angels with him then shall hee sit vpon the throne of his glory.
 and before him shall be gathered all nations and he shall separate them one from another as a shepheard diuideth his sheepe from the goats.
 and he shall set the sheepe on his right hand but the goats on the left.
 then shall the king say vnto them on his right hand come ye blessed of my father inherit the kingdome prepared for you from the foundation of the world.
 for i was an hungred and yee gaue me meate.
 i was thirstie and ye gaue me drinke.
 i was a stranger and ye tooke me in.
 naked and ye clothed me.
 i was sicke and yee visited me.
 i was in prison and ye came vnto me.
 then shal the righteous answere him saying lord when saw we thee an hungred and fedde thee.
 or thirstie and gaue thee drinke.
 when saw wee thee a stranger and tooke thee in.
 or naked and clothed thee.
 or when saw we thee sicke or in prison and came vnto thee.
 and the king shall answere and say vnto them uerely i say vnto you in as much as ye haue done it vnto one of the least of these my brethren ye haue done it vnto me.
 then shall he say also vnto them on the left hand depart from me ye cursed into euerlasting fire prepared for the deuill and his angels.
 for i was an hungred and yee gaue me no meat.
 i was thirstie and ye gaue me no drinke.
 i was a stranger and yee tooke me not in.
 naked and ye clothed mee not.
 sicke and in prison and yee visited me not.
 then shall they also answere him saying lord when saw we thee an hungred or athirst or a stranger or naked or sicke or in prison and did not minister vnto thee.
 then shall he answere them saying uerely i say vnto you in as much as ye did it not to one of the least of these ye did it not to me.
 and these shall goe away into euerlasting punishment.
 but the righteous into life eternall.
 and it came to passe when iesus had finished al these sayings hee said vnto his disciples ye know that after two dayes is the feast of the passeouer and the sonne of man is betrayed to be crucified.
 then assembled together the chiefe priests and the scribes and the elders of the people vnto the palace of the high priest who was called caiaphas and consulted that they might take iesus by subtiltie and kill him.
 but they said not on the feast day lest there bee an vproare among the people.
 now when iesus was in bethanie in the house of simon the leper there came vnto him a woman hauing an alabaster boxe of very precious ointment and powred it on his head as he sate at meat.
 but when his disciples saw it they had indignation saying to what purpose is this waste.
 for this ointment might haue bin sold for much and giuen to the poore.
 when iesus vnderstood it he said vnto them why trouble ye the woman.
 for she hath wrought a good worke vpon me.
 for ye haue the poore alwayes with you but me ye haue not alwayes.
 for in that she hath powred this ointment on my body shee did it for my buriall.
 uerely i say vnto you wheresoeuer this gospel shall be preached in the whole world there shall also this that this woman hath done be told for a memoriall of her.
 then one of the twelue called iudas iscariot went vnto the chiefe priests and said vnto them what will ye giue me and i will deliuer him vnto you.
 and they couenanted with him for thirtie pieces of siluer.
 and from that time he sought opportunitie to betray him.
 now the first day of the feast of vnleauened bread the disciples came to iesus saying vnto him where wilt thou that we prepare for thee to eat the passeouer.
 and he said goe into the citie to such a man and say vnto him the master saith my time is at hand i will keepe the passeouer at thy house with my disciples.
 and the disciples did as iesus had appointed them and they made ready the passeouer.
 now when the euen was come he sate downe with the twelue.
 and as they did eate he said uerely i say vnto you that one of you shal betray me.
 and they were exceeding sorowfull and began euery one of them to say vnto him lord is it i.
 and he answered and said hee that dippeth his hand with mee in the dish the same shall betray me.
 the sonne of man goeth as it is written of him.
 but woe vnto that man by whom the sonne of man is betrayed.
 it had bin good for that man if hee had not bene borne.
 then iudas which betrayed him answered and said master is it i.
 he said vnto him thou hast said.
 and as they were eating iesus took bread and blessed it and brake it and gaue it to the disciples and said take eate this is my body.
 and he tooke the cup and gaue thankes and gaue it to them saying drinke ye all of it.
 for this is my blood of the new testament which is shed for many for the remission of sinnes.
 but i say vnto you i will not drinke henceforth of this fruite of the vine vntill that day when i drinke it new with you in my fathers kingdom.
 and when they had sung an hymne they went out into the mount of oliues.
 then saith iesus vnto them all ye shall be offended because of me this night for it is written i will smite the shepheard and the sheepe of the flocke shall be scattered abroad.
 but after i am risen againe i will goe before you into galilee.
 peter answered and said vnto him though all men shall be offended because of thee yet will i neuer be offended.
 iesus said vnto him uerily i say vnto thee that this might before the cocke crow thou shalt denie me thrise.
 peter said vnto him though i should die with thee yet will i not denie thee.
 likewise also said all the disciples.
 then commeth iesus with them vnto a place called gethsemane and saith vnto the disciples sit yee heere while i goe and pray yonder.
 and hee tooke with him peter and the two sonnes of zebedee and beganne to be sorrowful and very heauie.
 then saith he vnto them my soule is exceeding sorrowfull euen vnto death.
 tary ye heere watch with me.
 and he went a little further and fell on his face and prayed saying o my father if it be possible let this cup passe from me.
 neuerthelesse not as i will but as thou wilt.
 and he commeth vnto the disciples and findeth them asleepe and saith vnto peter what could ye not watch with me one houre.
 watch and pray that yee enter not into temptation.
 the spirit indeed is willing but the flesh is weake.
 he went away again the second time and prayed saying o my father if this cup may not passe away from me except i drinke it thy will be done.
 and he came and found them asleep againe.
 for their eies were heauie.
 and he left them and went away againe and prayed the third time saying the same words.
 then commeth he to his disciples and saith vnto them sleepe on now and take your rest behold the houre is at hand and the sonne of man is betrayed into the hands of sinners.
 rise let vs be going.
 behold he is at hand that doeth betray me.
 and while yet spake loe iudas one of the twelue came and with him a great multitude with swords and staues from the chiefe priests and elders of the people.
 now he that betrayed him gaue them a signe saying whomsoeuer i shall kisse that same is he hold him fast.
 and forthwith hee came to iesus and said haile master and kissed him.
 and iesus said vnto him friend wherefore art thou come.
 then came they and laid handes on iesus and tooke him.
 and behold one of them which were with iesus stretched out his hand and drew his sword and stroke a seruant of the high priests and smote off his eare.
 then said iesus vnto him put vp againe thy sword into his place.
 for all they that take the sword shall perish with the sword.
 thinkest thou that i cannot now pray to my father and he shall presently giue me more then twelue legions of angels.
 but how then shall the scriptures be fulfilled that thus it must be.
 in that same houre said iesus to the multitudes are ye come out as against a thiefe with swords and staues for to take mee.
 i sate daily with you teaching in the temple and ye laide no hold on me.
 but all this was done that the scriptures of the prophets might be fulfilled.
 then all the disciples forsooke him and fled.
 and they that had laid hold on iesus led him away to caiaphas the high priest where the scribes and the elders were assembled.
 but peter followed him afarre off vnto the high priests palace and went in and sate with the seruants to see the end.
 now the chiefe priests and elders and all the councell sought false witnesse against iesus to put him to death but found none.
 yea though many false witnesses came yet found they none.
 at the last came two false witnesses and said this fellow said i am able to destroy the temple of god and to build it in three dayes.
 and the high priest arose and said vnto him answerest thou nothing.
 what is it which these witnesse against thee.
 but iesus held his peace.
 and the high priest answered and said vnto him i adiure thee by the liuing god that thou tell vs whether thou bee the christ the sonne of god.
 iesus saith vnto him thou hast saide.
 neuerthelesse i say vnto you hereafter shall yee see the sonne of man sitting on the right hand of power and coming in the clouds of heauen.
 then the high priest rent his clothes saying he hath spoken blasphemie.
 what further need haue wee of witnesses.
 behold now ye haue heard his blasphemie.
 what thinke ye.
 they answered and said he is guiltie of death.
 then did they spit in his face and buffeted him and others smote him with the palmes of their hands saying prophecie vnto vs thou christ who is he that smote thee.
 now peter sate without in the palace.
 and a damosell came vnto him saying thou also wast with iesus of galilee.
 but hee denied before them all saying i know not what thou saiest.
 and when he was gone out into the porch another maide saw him and saide vnto them that were there this fellow was also with iesus of nazareth.
 and againe hee denied with an oath i doe not know the man.
 and after a while came vnto him they that stood by and saide to peter surely thou also art one of them for thy speech bewrayeth thee.
 then beganne hee to curse and to sweare saying i know not the man.
 and immediatly the cocke crew.
 and peter remembred the words of iesus which said vnto him before the cocke crow thou shalt denie mee thrice.
 and hee went out and wept bitterly.
 when the morning was come all the chiefe priests and elders of the people tooke counsell against iesus to put him to death.
 and when they had bound him they led him away and deliuered him to pontius pilate the gouernour.
 then iudas which had betraied him when he saw that hee was condemned repented himselfe and brought againe the thirtie pieces of siluer to the chiefe priests and elders saying i haue sinned in that i haue betraied the innocent blood.
 and they said what is that to vs.
 see thou to that.
 and hee cast downe the pieces of siluer in the temple and departed and went and hanged himselfe.
 and the chiefe priests tooke the siluer pieces and said it is not lawfull for to put them into the treasurie because it is the price of blood.
 and they tooke counsell and bought with them the potters field to burie strangers in.
 wherefore that field was called the field of blood vnto this day.
 then was fulfilled that which was spoken by ieremie the prophet saying and they tooke the thirtie pieces of siluer the price of him that was valued whom they of the children of israel did value.
 and gaue them for the potters field as the lord appointed me.
 and iesus stood before the gouernour and the gouernour asked him saying.
 art thou the king of the iewes.
 and iesus sayd vnto him thou sayest.
 and when hee was accused of the chiefe priests and elders he answered nothing.
 then saith pilate vnto him hearest thou not how many things they witnesse against thee.
 and he answered him to neuer a word.
 insomuch that the gouernour marueiled greatly.
 now at that feast the gouernor was woont to release vnto the people a prisoner whom they would.
 and they had then a notable prisoner called barabbas.
 therefore when they were gathered together pilate said vnto them whom will ye that i release vnto you.
 barabbas or iesus which is called christ.
 for hee knew that for enuie they had deliuered him.
 when he was set downe on the iudgement seate his wife sent vnto him saying haue thou nothing to doe with that iust man.
 for i haue suffered many things this day in a dreame because of him.
 but the chiefe priestes and elders perswaded the multitude that they should aske barabbas destroy iesus.
 the gouernour answered and said vnto them whether of the twaine will ye that i release vnto you.
 they said barabbas.
 pilate said vnto them what shall i doe then with iesus which is called christ.
 they all sayde vnto him let him be crucified.
 and the gouernour said why what euil hath he done.
 but they cried out the more saying let him be crucified.
 when pilate saw that he could preuaile nothing but that rather a tumult was made hee tooke water and washed his hands before the multitude saying i am innocent of the blood of this iust person.
 see yee to it.
 then answered all the people and said his blood be on vs and on our children.
 then released hee barabbas vnto them and when he had scourged iesus he deliuered him to be crucified.
 then the souldiers of the gouernour tooke iesus into the common hall and gathered vnto him the whole band of souldiers.
 and they stripped him and put on him a scarlet robe.
 and when they had platted a crowne of thornes they put it vpon his head and a reed in his right hand.
 and they bowed the knee before him and mocked him saying haile king of the iewes.
 and they spit vpon him and tooke the reed and smote him on the head.
 and after that they had mocked him they tooke the robe off from him and put his owne raiment on him and led him away to crucifie him.
 and as they came out they found a man of cyrene simon by name.
 him they compelled to beare his crosse.
 and when they were come vnto a place called golgotha that is to say a place of a skull they gaue him vineger to drinke mingled with gall.
 and when hee had tasted thereof hee would not drinke.
 and they crucified him and parted his garments casting lots.
 that it might be fulfilled which was spoken by the prophet they parted my garments among them and vpon my vesture did they cast lots.
 and sitting downe they watched him there.
 and set vp ouer his head his accusation written this is iesvs the king of the iewes.
 then were there two theeues crucified with him.
 one on the right hand and another on the left.
 and they that passed by reuiled him wagging their heads and saying thou that destroyest the temple buildest it in three dayes saue thy selfe.
 if thou be the sonne of god come downe from the crosse.
 likewise also the chiefe priests mocking him with the scribes and elders said he saued others himselfe he cannot saue.
 if he be the king of israel let him now come downe from the crosse and we will beleeue him.
 he trusted in god let him deliuer him now if hee will haue him.
 for he said i am the sonne of god.
 the thieues also which were crucified with him cast the same in his teeth.
 now from the sixth houre there was darkenesse ouer all the land vnto the ninth houre.
 and about the ninth houre iesus cried with a loud voyce saying eli eli lamasabachthani that is to say my god my god why hast thou forsaken mee.
 some of them that stood there when they heard that said this man calleth for elias.
 and straightway one of them ran and tooke a spunge and filled it with vineger and put it on a reede and gaue him to drinke.
 the rest said let bee let vs see whether elias will come to saue him.
 iesus when hee had cried againe with a loud voice yeelded vp the ghost.
 and behold the vaile of the temple was rent in twaine from the top to the bottome and the earth did quake and the rocks rent.
 and the graues were opened and many bodies of saints which slept arose and came out of the graues after his resurrection and went into the holy citie and appeared vnto many.
 now when the centurion and they that were with him watching iesus saw the earthquake those things that were done they feared greatly saying truely this was the son of god.
 and many women were there beholding afarre off which followed iesus from galilee ministring vnto him.
 among which was mary magdalene mary the mother of iames and ioses and the mother of zebedees children.
 when the euen was come there came a rich man of arimathea named ioseph who also himselfe was iesus disciple.
 he went to pilate and begged the body of iesus.
 then pilate commanded the body to be deliuered.
 and when ioseph had taken the body hee wrapped it in a cleane linnen cloth and laide it in his owne newe tombe which he had hewen out in the rocke.
 and he rolled a great stone to the doore of the sepulchre and departed.
 and there was mary magdalene and the other mary sitting ouer against the sepulchre.
 now the next day that followed the day of the preparation the chiefe priests and pharisees came together vnto pilate saying sir we remember that that deceiuer said while he was yet aliue after three daies i wil rise againe.
 command therfore that the sepulchre be made sure vntill the third day lest his disciples come by night steale him away and say vnto the people he is risen from the dead.
 so the last errour shalbe worse then the first.
 pilate said vnto them yee haue a watch goe your way make it as sure as you can.
 so they went and made the sepulchre sure sealing the stone and setting a watch.
 in the ende of the sabbath as it began to dawne towards the first day of the weeke came mary magdalene and the other mary to see the sepulchre.
 and behold there was a great earthquake for the angel of the lord descended from heauen and came and rolled backe the stone from the doore and sate vpon it.
 his countenance was like lightning and his raiment white as snowe.
 and for feare of him the keepers did shake and became as dead men.
 and the angel answered and said vnto the women feare not ye.
 for i know that ye seeke iesus which was crucified.
 he is not here.
 for he is risen as hee said.
 come see the place where the lord lay.
 and goe quickly and tell his disciples that he is risen from the dead.
 and behold hee goeth before you into galilee there shall ye see him.
 loe i haue told you.
 and they departed quickly from the sepulchre with feare and great ioy and did run to bring his disciples word.
 and as they went to tell his disciples behold iesus met them saying all haile.
 and they came and held him by the feet and worshipped him.
 then said iesus vnto them be not afraid.
 goe tell my brethren that they goe into galilee and there shall they see me.
 now when they were going behold some of the watch came into the citie and shewed vnto the chiefe priests all the things that were done.
 and when they were assembled with the elders and had taken counsell they gaue large money vnto the souldiers saying say ye his disciples came by night and stole him away while we slept.
 and if this come to the gouernours eares wee will perswade him and secure you.
 so they tooke the money and did as they were taught.
 and this saying is commonly reported among the iewes vntill this day.
 then the eleuen disciples went away into galilee into a mountaine where iesus had appointed them.
 and when they saw him they worshipped him.
 but some doubted.
 and iesus came and spake vnto them saying all power is giuen vnto me in heauen and in earth.
 goe ye therefore and teach all nations baptizing them in the name of the father and of the sonne and of the holy ghost.
 teaching them to obserue all things whatsoeuer i haue commanded you.
 and loe i am with you alway euen vnto the end of the world.
 amen.
 