in the beginning god created the heauen and the earth.
 and the earth was without forme and voyd and darkenesse was vpon the face of the deepe.
 and the spirit of god mooued vpon the face of the waters.
 and god said let there be light.
 and there was light.
 and god saw the light that it was good.
 and god diuided the light from the darkenesse.
 and god called the light day and the darknesse he called night.
 and the euening and the morning were the first day.
 and god said let there be a firmament in the midst of the waters.
 and let it diuide the waters from the waters.
 and god made the firmament.
 and diuided the waters which were vnder the firmament from the waters which were aboue the firmament.
 and it was so.
 and god called the firmament heauen.
 and the euening and the morning were the second day.
 and god said let the waters vnder the heauen be gathered together vnto one place and let the dry land appeare.
 and it was so.
 and god called the drie land earth and the gathering together of the waters called hee seas.
 and god saw that it was good.
 and god said let the earth bring foorth grasse the herbe yeelding seed and the fruit tree yeelding fruit after his kinde whose seed is in it selfe vpon the earth.
 and it was so.
 and the earth brought foorth grasse and herbe yeelding seed after his kinde and the tree yeelding fruit whose seed was in it selfe after his kinde.
 and god saw that it was good.
 and the euening and the morning were the third day.
 and god said let there bee lights in the firmament of the heauen to diuide the day from the night.
 and let them be for signes and for seasons and for dayes and yeeres.
 and let them be for lights in the firmament of the heauen to giue light vpon the earth.
 and it was so.
 and god made two great lights.
 the greater light to rule the day and the lesser light to rule the night.
 he made the starres also.
 and god set them in the firmament of the heauen to giue light vpon the earth.
 and to rule ouer the day and ouer the night and to diuide the light from the darkenesse.
 and god saw that it was good.
 and the euening and the morning were the fourth day.
 and god said let the waters bring foorth aboundantly the mouing creature that hath life and foule that may flie aboue the earth in the open firmament of heauen.
 and god created great whales and euery liuing creature that moueth which the waters brought forth aboundantly after their kinde and euery winged foule after his kinde.
 and god saw that it was good.
 and god blessed them saying be fruitfull and multiply and fill the waters in the seas and let foule multiply in the earth.
 and the euening and the morning were the fift day.
 and god said let the earth bring forth the liuing creature after his kinde cattell and creeping thing and beast of the earth after his kinde.
 and it was so.
 and god made the beast of the earth after his kinde and cattell after their kinde and euery thing that creepeth vpon the earth after his kinde.
 and god saw that it was good.
 and god said let vs make man in our image after our likenesse.
 and let them haue dominion ouer the fish of the sea and ouer the foule of the aire and ouer the cattell and ouer all the earth and ouer euery creeping thing that creepeth vpon the earth.
 so god created man in his owne image in the image of god created hee him.
 male and female created hee them.
 and god blessed them and god said vnto them be fruitfull and multiply and replenish the earth and subdue it and haue dominion ouer the fish of the sea and ouer the foule of the aire and ouer euery liuing thing that mooueth vpon the earth.
 and god said behold i haue giuen you euery herbe bearing seede which is vpon the face of all the earth and euery tree in the which is the fruit of a tree yeelding seed to you it shall be for meat.
 and to euery beast of the earth and to euery foule of the aire and to euery thing that creepeth vpon the earth wherein there is life i haue giuen euery greene herbe for meat.
 and it was so.
 and god saw euery thing that hee had made.
 and behold it was very good.
 and the euening and the morning were the sixth day.
 thus the heauens and the earth were finished and all the hoste of them.
 and on the seuenth day god ended his worke which hee had made.
 and he rested on the seuenth day from all his worke which he had made.
 and god blessed the seuenth day and sanctified it.
 because that in it he had rested from all his worke which god created and made.
 these are the generations of the heauens of the earth when they were created.
 in the day that the lord god made the earth and the heauens and euery plant of the field before it was in the earth and euery herbe of the field before it grew.
 for the lord god had not caused it to raine vpon the earth and there was not a man to till the ground.
 but there went vp a mist from the earth and watered the whole face of the ground.
 and the lord god formed man of the dust of the ground breathed into his nostrils the breath of life.
 and man became a liuing soule.
 and the lord god planted a garden eastward in eden.
 and there he put the man whom he had formed.
 and out of the ground made the lord god to grow euery tree that is pleasant to the sight and good for food.
 the tree of life also in the midst of the garden and the tree of knowledge of good and euill.
 and a riuer went out of eden to water the garden and from thence it was parted and became into foure heads.
 the name of the first is pison.
 that is it which compasseth the whole land of hauilah where there is gold.
 and the gold of that land is good.
 there is bdellium and the onix stone.
 and the name of the second riuer is gihon.
 the same is it that compasseth the whole land of ethiopia.
 and the name of the third riuer is hiddekel.
 that is it which goeth toward the east of assyria.
 and the fourth riuer is euphrates.
 and the lord god tooke the man and put him into the garden of eden to dresse it and to keepe it.
 and the lord god commanded the man saying of euery tree of the garden thou mayest freely eate.
 but of the tree of the knowledge of good and euill thou shalt not eate of it.
 for in the day that thou eatest thereof thou shalt surely die.
 and the lord god said it is not good that the man should be alone.
 i will make him an helpe meet for him.
 and out of the ground the lord god formed euery beast of the field and euery foule of the aire and brought them vnto adam to see what he would call them.
 and whatsoeuer adam called euery liuing creature that was the name thereof.
 and adam gaue names to all cattell and to the foule of the aire and to euery beast of the fielde.
 but for adam there was not found an helpe meete for him.
 and the lord god caused a deepe sleepe to fall vpon adam and hee slept.
 and he tooke one of his ribs and closed vp the flesh in stead thereof.
 and the rib which the lord god had taken from man made hee a woman brought her vnto the man.
 and adam said this is now bone of my bones and flesh of my flesh.
 she shalbe called woman because shee was taken out of man.
 therefore shall a man leaue his father and his mother and shall cleaue vnto his wife.
 and they shalbe one flesh.
 and they were both naked the man his wife and were not ashamed.
 now the serpent was more subtill then any beast of the field which the lord god had made and he said vnto the woman yea hath god said ye shall not eat of euery tree of the garden.
 and the woman said vnto the serpent wee may eate of the fruite of the trees of the garden.
 but of the fruit of the tree which is in the midst of the garden god hath said ye shal not eate of it neither shall ye touch it lest ye die.
 and the serpent said vnto the woman ye shall not surely die.
 for god doeth know that in the day ye eate thereof then your eyes shalbee opened.
 and yee shall bee as gods knowing good and euill.
 and when the woman saw that the tree was good for food and that it was pleasant to the eyes and a tree to be desired to make one wise she tooke of the fruit thereof and did eate and gaue also vnto her husband with her and hee did eate.
 and the eyes of them both were opened they knew that they were naked and they sewed figge leaues together and made themselues aprons.
 and they heard the voyce of the lord god walking in the garden in the coole of the day.
 and adam and his wife hid themselues from the presence of the lord god amongst the trees of the garden.
 and the lord god called vnto adam and said vnto him where art thou.
 and he said i heard thy voice in the garden.
 and i was afraid because i was naked and i hid my selfe.
 and he said who told thee that thou wast naked.
 hast thou eaten of the tree whereof i commanded thee that thou shouldest not eate.
 and the man said the woman whom thou gauest to be with mee shee gaue me of the tree and i did eate.
 and the lord god said vnto the woman what is this that thou hast done.
 and the woman said the serpent beguiled me and i did eate.
 and the lord god said vnto the serpent because thou hast done this thou art cursed aboue all cattel and aboue euery beast of the field.
 vpon thy belly shalt thou goe and dust shalt thou eate all the dayes of thy life.
 and i will put enmitie betweene thee and the woman and betweene thy seed and her seed.
 it shal bruise thy head and thou shalt bruise his heele.
 unto the woman he said i will greatly multiply thy sorowe and thy conception.
 in sorow thou shalt bring forth children.
 and thy desire shall be to thy husband and hee shall rule ouer thee.
 and vnto adam he said because thou hast hearkened vnto the voyce of thy wife and hast eaten of the tree of which i commaunded thee saying thou shalt not eate of it.
 cursed is the ground for thy sake.
 in sorow shalt thou eate of it all the dayes of thy life.
 thornes also and thistles shall it bring forth to thee.
 and thou shalt eate the herbe of the field.
 in the sweate of thy face shalt thou eate bread till thou returne vnto the ground.
 for out of it wast thou taken for dust thou art and vnto dust shalt thou returne.
 and adam called his wiues name eue because she was the mother of all liuing.
 unto adam also and to his wife did the lord god make coates of skinnes and cloathed them.
 and the lord god said behold the man is become as one of vs to know good euill.
 and now lest hee put foorth his hand and take also of the tree of life and eate and liue for euer.
 therefore the lord god sent him foorth from the garden of eden to till the ground from whence he was taken.
 so he droue out the man.
 and he placed at the east of the garden of eden cherubims and a flaming sword which turned euery way to keepe the way of the tree of life.
 and adam knew eue his wife and shee conceiued and bare cain and said i haue gotten a man from the lord.
 and she againe bare his brother abel and abel was a keeper of sheep but cain was a tiller of the ground.
 and in processe of time it came to passe that cain brought of the fruite of the ground an offering vnto the lord.
 and abel he also brought of the firstlings of his flocke and of the fat thereof.
 and the lord had respect vnto abel and to his offering.
 but vnto cain and to his offring he had not respect.
 and cain was very wroth and his countenance fell.
 and the lord said vnto cain why art thou wroth.
 and why is thy countenance fallen.
 if thou doe well shalt thou not be accepted.
 and if thou doest not well sinne lieth at the doore.
 and vnto thee shall be his desire and thou shalt rule ouer him.
 and cain talked with abel his brother.
 and it came to passe when they were in the field that cain rose vp against abel his brother and slew him.
 and the lord said vnto cain where is abel thy brother.
 and hee said i know not.
 am i my brothers keeper.
 and he said what hast thou done.
 the voyce of thy brothers blood cryeth vnto me from the ground.
 and now art thou cursed from the earth which hath opened her mouth to receiue thy brothers blood from thy hand.
 when thou tillest the ground it shall not henceforth yeeld vnto thee her strength.
 a fugitiue and a vagabond shalt thou be in the earth.
 and cain said vnto the lord my punishment is greater then i can beare.
 behold thou hast driuen me out this day from the face of the earth and from thy face shall i be hid and i shall be a fugitiue and a vagabond in the earth.
 and it shall come to passe that euery one that findeth me shall slay me.
 and the lord said vnto him therefore whosoeuer slayeth cain vengeance shalbe taken on him seuen fold.
 and the lord set a marke vpon cain lest any finding him should kill him.
 and cain went out from the presence of the lord and dwelt in the land of nod on the east of eden.
 and cain knew his wife and she conceiued and bare enoch and hee builded a city and called the name of the city after the name of his sonne enoch.
 and vnto enoch was borne irad.
 and irad begate mehuiael and mehuiael begate methusael and methusael begate lamech.
 and lamech tooke vnto him two wiues.
 the name of the one was adah and the name of the other zillah.
 and adah bare iabal.
 he was the father of such as dwell in tents and of such as haue cattell.
 and his brothers name was iubal.
 hee was the father of all such as handle the harpe and organ.
 and zillah she also bare tubalcain an instructer of euery artificer in brasse and iron.
 and the sister of tubalcain was naamah.
 and lamech sayd vnto his wiues adah and zillah heare my voyce yee wiues of lamech hearken vnto my speech.
 for i haue slaine a man to my wounding and a yong man to my hurt.
 if cain shall bee auenged seuen fold truely lamech seuenty and seuen folde.
 and adam knew his wife againe and she bare a sonne called his name seth.
 for god said she hath appointed mee another seed in stead of abel whom cain slew.
 and to seth to him also there was borne a sonne and he called his name enos.
 then began men to call vpon the name of the lord.
 this is the booke of the generations of adam.
 in the day that god created man in the likenes of god made he him.
 male and female created hee them and blessed them and called their name adam in the day when they were created.
 and adam liued an hundred and thirtie yeeres and begate a sonne in his owne likenesse after his image.
 and called his name seth.
 and the dayes of adam after he had begotten seth were eight hundred yeeres.
 and he begate sonnes and daughters.
 and all the dayes that adam liued were nine hundred and thirtie yeeres.
 and he died.
 and seth liued an hundred and fiue yeeres.
 and begate enos.
 and seth liued after he begate enos eight hundred and seuen yeeres and begate sonnes and daughters.
 and all the dayes of seth were nine hundred and twelue yeeres and he died.
 and enos liued ninetie yeeres and begate cainan.
 and enos liued after hee begate cainan eight hundred and fifteene yeeres and begate sonnes daughters.
 and all the dayes of enos were nine hundred fiue yeres.
 and he died.
 and cainan liued seuentie yeeres and begate mahalaleel.
 and cainan liued after he begate mahalaleel eight hundred and fourtie yeeres begate sonnes and daughters.
 and al the dayes of cainan were nine hundred ten yeres.
 and he died.
 and mahalaleel liued sixtie and fiue yeeres and begat iared.
 and mahalaleel liued after he begate iared eight hundred and thirtie yeeres and begate sonnes daughters.
 and all the dayes of mahalaleel were eight hundred ninetie and fiue yeeres and he died.
 and iared liued an hundred sixtie and two yeeres he begat enoch.
 and iared liued after he begate enoch eight hundred yeres and begate sonnes and daughters.
 and all the dayes of iared were nine hundred sixtie and two yeeres and he died.
 and enoch liued sixtie and fiue yeeres and begate methuselah.
 and enoch walked with god after he begate methuselah three hundred yeeres and begate sonnes and daughters.
 and all the dayes of enoch were three hundred sixtie and fiue yeeres.
 and enoch walked with god.
 and he was not.
 for god tooke him.
 and methuselah liued an hundred eightie and seuen yeeres and begat lamech.
 and methuselah liued after hee begate lamech seuen hundred eightie and two yeeres and begate sonnes and daughters.
 and all the dayes of methuselah were nine hundred sixtie and nine yeeres and he died.
 and lamech liued an hundred eightie and two yeeres.
 and begate a sonne.
 and he called his name noah saying.
 this same shall comfort vs concerning our woorke and toyle of our hands because of the ground which the lord hath cursed.
 and lamech liued after hee begate noah fiue hundred ninetie and fiue yeeres and begate sonnes and daughters.
 and all the dayes of lamech were seuen hundred seuentie and seuen yeeres and he died.
 and noah was fiue hundred yeeres olde.
 and noah begate sem ham and iapheth.
 and it came to passe when men began to multiply on the face of the earth and daughters were borne vnto them.
 that the sonnes of god saw the daughters of men that they were faire and they took them wiues of all which they chose.
 and the lord said my spirit shall not alwayes striue with man.
 for that hee also is flesh.
 yet his dayes shalbe an hundred and twenty yeeres.
 there were giants in the earth in those daies.
 and also after that when the sonnes of god came in vnto the daughters of men they bare children to them.
 the same became mightie men which were of old men of renowme.
 and god saw that the wickednes of man was great in the earth and that euery imagination of the thoughts of his heart was onely euill continually.
 and it repented the lord that he had made man on the earth and it grieued him at his heart.
 and the lord said i will destroy man whom i haue created from the face of the earth.
 both man and beast and the creeping thing and the foules of the aire.
 for it repenteth me that i haue made them.
 but noah found grace in the eyes of the lord.
 these are the generations of noah.
 noah was a iust man and perfect in his generations and noah walked with god.
 and noah begate three sonnes.
 sem ham and iapheth.
 the earth also was corrupt before god.
 and the earth was filled with violence.
 and god looked vpon the earth and behold it was corrupt.
 for all flesh had corrupted his way vpon the earth.
 and god said vnto noah the end of all flesh is come before mee.
 for the earth is filled with violence through them.
 and behold i will destroy them with the earth.
 make thee an arke of gopherwood.
 roomes shalt thou make in the arke and shalt pitch it within and without with pitch.
 and this is the fashion which thou shalt make it of.
 the length of the arke shalbe three hundred cubits the breadth of it fifty cubits and the height of it thirtie cubits.
 a window shalt thou make to the arke and in a cubite shalt thou finish it aboue.
 and the doore of the arke shalt thou set in the side thereof.
 with lower second and third stories shalt thou make it.
 and behold i euen i doe bring a flood of waters vpon the earth to destroy all flesh wherein is the breath of life from vnder heauen and euery thing that is in the earth shall die.
 but with thee wil i establish my couenant.
 and thou shalt come into the arke thou and thy sonnes and thy wife and thy sonnes wiues with thee.
 and of euery liuing thing of all flesh two of euery sort shalt thou bring into the arke to keepe them aliue with thee.
 they shall be male and female.
 of fowles after their kinde and of cattel after their kinde.
 of euery creeping thing of the earth after his kinde two of euery sort shall come vnto thee to keepe them aliue.
 and take thou vnto thee of all food that is eaten and thou shalt gather it to thee.
 and it shall be for food for thee and for them.
 thus did noah.
 according to all that god commanded him so did he.
 and the lord saide vnto noah come thou and all thy house into the arke.
 for thee haue i seene righteous before me in this generation.
 of euery cleane beast thou shalt take to thee by seuens the male and his female.
 and of beastes that are not cleane by two the male and his female.
 of fowles also of the aire by seuens the male the female.
 to keepe seed aliue vpon the face of all the earth.
 for yet seuen dayes and i will cause it to raine vpon the earth fortie dayes and forty nights.
 and euery liuing substance that i haue made will i destroy from off the face of the earth.
 and noah did according vnto all that the lord commanded him.
 and noah was sixe hundred yeeres old when the flood of waters was vpon the earth.
 and noah went in and his sonnes and his wife and his sonnes wiues with him into the arke because of the waters of the flood.
 of cleane beasts of beasts that are not cleane of fowles and of euery thing that creepeth vpon the earth there went in two and two vnto noah into the arke the male the female as god had commanded noah.
 and it came to passe after seuen dayes that the waters of the flood were vpon the earth.
 in the sixe hundredth yeere of noahs life in the second moneth the seuenteenth day of the moneth the same day were al the fountaines of the great deepe broken vp and the windowes of heauen were opened.
 and the raine was vpon the earth fortie dayes and fortie nights.
 in the selfe same day entred noah and sem and ham and iapheth the sonnes of noah and noahs wife and the three wiues of his sonnes with them into the arke they and euery beast after his kinde all the cattell after their kinde.
 and euery creeping thing that creepeth vpon the earth after his kinde and euery foule after his kinde euery birde of euery sort.
 and they went in vnto noah into the arke two and two of all flesh wherein is the breath of life.
 and they that went in went in male and female of all flesh as god had commaunded him.
 and the lord shut him in.
 and the flood was fortie dayes vpon the earth and the waters increased and bare vp the arke and it was lift vp aboue the earth.
 and the waters preuailed and were encreased greatly vpon the earth.
 and the arke went vpon the face of the waters.
 and the waters preuailed exceedingly vpon the earth and all the high hils that were vnder the whole heauen were couered.
 fifteene cubits vpward did the waters preuaile.
 and the mountaines were couered.
 and all flesh died that mooued vpon the earth both of fowle of cattell and of beast and of euery creeping thing that creepeth vpon the earth and euery man.
 all in whose nosethrils was the breath of life of all that was in the dry land died.
 and euery liuing substance was destroyed which was vpon the face of the ground both man and cattell and the creeping things and the foule of the heauen.
 and they were destroyed from the earth.
 and noah onely remained aliue and they that were with him in the arke.
 and the waters preuailed vpon the earth an hundred and fifty dayes.
 and god remembred noah and euery liuing thing and all the cattell that was with him in the arke.
 and god made a winde to passe ouer the earth and the waters asswaged.
 the fountaines also of the deepe and the windowes of heauen were stopped and the raine from heauen was restrained.
 and the waters returned from off the earth continually.
 and after the end of the hundred and fiftie dayes the waters were abated.
 and the arke rested in the seuenth moneth on the seuenteenth day of the moneth vpon the mountaines of ararat.
 and the waters decreased continually vntill the tenth moneth.
 in the tenth moneth on the first day of the moneth were the tops of the mountaines seene.
 and it came to passe at the end of forty dayes that noah opened the window of the arke which he had made.
 and he sent forth a rauen which went foorth to and fro vntill the waters were dried vp from off the earth.
 also hee sent foorth a doue from him to see if the waters were abated from off the face of the ground.
 but the doue found no rest for the sole of her foote and she returned vnto him into the arke.
 for the waters were on the face of the whole earth.
 then he put foorth his hand and tooke her and pulled her in vnto him into the arke.
 and hee stayed yet other seuen dayes.
 and againe hee sent foorth the doue out of the arke.
 and the doue came in to him in the euening and loe in her mouth was an oliue leafe pluckt off.
 so noah knew that the waters were abated from off the earth.
 and hee stayed yet other seuen dayes and sent forth the doue which returned not againe vnto him any more.
 and it came to passe in the sixe hundredth and one yeere in the first moneth the first day of the moneth the waters were dryed vp from off the earth.
 and noah remooued the couering of the arke and looked and behold the face of the ground was drie.
 and in the second moneth on the seuen and twentieth day of the moneth was the earth dried.
 and god spake vnto noah saying goe foorth of the arke thou and thy wife and thy sonnes and thy sonnes wiues with thee.
 bring foorth with thee euery liuing thing that is with thee of all flesh both of fowle and of cattell and of euery creeping thing that creepeth vpon the earth that they may breed abundantly in the earth and be fruitfull and multiply vpon the earth.
 and noah went foorth and his sonnes and his wife and his sonnes wiues with him.
 euery beast euery creeping thing and euery fowle and whatsoeuer creepeth vpon the earth after their kinds went foorth out of the arke.
 and noah builded an altar vnto the lord and tooke of euery cleane beast and of euery cleane fowle and offred burnt offrings on the altar.
 and the lord smelled a sweete sauour and the lord said in his heart i will not againe curse the ground any more for mans sake.
 for the imagination of mans heart is euil from his youth.
 neither will i againe smite any more euery thing liuing as i haue done.
 while the earth remaineth seedtime and haruest and cold and heat and summer and winter and day and night shall not cease.
 and god blessed noah and his sonnes and said vnto them bee fruitfull and multiply and replenish the earth.
 and the feare of you the dread of you shall be vpon euery beast of the earth and vpon euery fowle of the aire vpon all that mooueth vpon the earth and vpon all the fishes of the sea.
 into your hand are they deliuered.
 euery mouing thing that liueth shalbe meat for you.
 euen as the greene herbe haue i giuen you all things.
 but flesh with the life thereof which is the blood thereof shall you not eate.
 and surely your blood of your liues will i require.
 at the hand of euery beast will i require it at the hand of man at the hand of euery mans brother will i require the life of man.
 who so sheddeth mans blood by man shall his blood be shed.
 for in the image of god made he man.
 and you be ye fruitfull and multiply bring foorth aboundantly in the earth and multiply therein.
 and god spake vnto noah and to his sonnes with him saying.
 and i behold i establish my couenant with you and with your seede after you.
 and with euery liuing creature that is with you of the fowle of the cattell and of euery beast of the earth with you from all that goe out of the arke to euery beast of the earth.
 and i wil establish my couenant with you neither shal all flesh be cut off any more by the waters of a flood neither shall there any more be a flood to destroy the earth.
 and god said this is the token of the couenant which i make betweene mee and you and euery liuing creature that is with you for perpetuall generations.
 i doe set my bow in the cloud and it shall be for a token of a couenant betweene me and the earth.
 and it shall come to passe when i bring a cloud ouer the earth that the bow shall be seene in the cloud.
 and i will remember my couenant which is betweene mee and you and euery liuing creature of all flesh.
 and the waters shall no more become a flood to destroy all flesh.
 and the bow shalbe in the cloud.
 and i will looke vpon it that i may remember the euerlasting couenant betweene god and euery liuing creature of all flesh that is vpon the earth.
 and god said vnto noah this is the token of the couenant which i haue established betweene mee and all flesh that is vpon the earth.
 and the sonnes of noah that went forth of the arke were shem and ham and iaphet.
 and ham is the father of canaan.
 these are the three sonnes of noah.
 and of them was the whole earth ouerspread.
 and noah began to bee an husbandman and he planted a vineyard.
 and he dranke of the wine and was drunken and hee was vncouered within his tent.
 and ham the father of canaan saw the nakednesse of his father and told his two brethren without.
 and shem and iaphet tooke a garment and layed it vpon both their shoulders and went backward and couered the nakednesse of their father and their faces were backward and they saw not their fathers nakednesse.
 and noah awoke from his wine and knew what his yonger sonne had done vnto him.
 and he said cursed bee canaan.
 a seruant of seruants shall hee be vnto his brethren.
 and hee saide blessed bee the lord god of shem and canaan shalbe his seruant.
 god shall enlarge iaphet and he shal dwel in the tents of shem and canaan shalbe his seruant.
 and noah liued after the flood three hundred and fifty yeeres.
 and all the dayes of noah were nine hundred fifty yeeres and he died.
 now these are the generations of the sonnes of noah.
 shem ham and iaphet.
 and vnto them were sonnes borne after the flood.
 the sonnes of iaphet.
 gomer and magog and madai and iauan tubal and meshech tiras.
 and the sonnes of gomer.
 ashkenaz and riphath and togarmah.
 and the sons of iauan.
 elishah and tarshish kittim and dodanim.
 by these were the iles of the gentiles diuided in their lands euery one after his tongue.
 after their families in their nations.
 and the sonnes of ham.
 cush and mizraim and phut and canaan.
 and the sonnes of cush seba and hauilah and sabtah and raamah and sabtecha.
 and the sonnes of raamah.
 sheba and dedan.
 and cush begat nimrod.
 he began to be a mighty one in the earth.
 he was a mighty hunter before the lord.
 wherefore it is saide euen as nimrod the mightie hunter before the lord.
 and the beginning of his kingdome was babel and erech and accad and calneh in the land of shinar.
 out of that land went forth asshur and builded nineueh and the citie rehoboth and calah and resen betweene nineueh and calah.
 the same is a great citie.
 and mizraim begat ludim and anamim and lehabim and naphtuhim and pathrusim and casluhim out of whome came philistiim and caphtorim.
 and canaan begate sidon his first borne and heth and the iebusite and the emorite and the girgasite and the hiuite and the arkite and the sinite and the aruadite and the zemarite and the hamathite.
 and afterward were the families of the canaanites spread abroad.
 and the border of the canaanites was from sidon as thou commest to gerar vnto gaza as thou goest vnto sodoma and gomorah and admah zeboim euen vnto lasha.
 these are the sonnes of ham after their families after their tongues in their countries and in their nations.
 unto shem also the father of all the children of eber the brother of iaphet the elder euen to him were children borne.
 the children of shem.
 elam and asshur and arphaxad and lud and aram.
 and the children of aram.
 uz and hul and gether and mash.
 and arphaxad begate salah and salah begate eber.
 and vnto eber were borne two sonnes.
 the name of one was peleg for in his dayes was the earth diuided and his brothers name was ioktan.
 and ioktan begate almodad and sheleph and hazarmaueth and ierah and hadoram and uzal and diklah and obal and abimael and sheba and ophir and hauilah iobab.
 all these were the sonnes of ioktan.
 and their dwelling was from mesha as thou goest vnto sephar a mount of the east.
 these are the sonnes of shem after their families after their tongues in their lands after their nations.
 these are the families of the sonnes of noah after their generations in their nations.
 and by these were the nations diuided in the earth after the flood.
 and the whole earth was of one language and of one speach.
 and it came to passe as they iourneyed from the east that they found a plaine in the land of shinar and they dwelt there.
 and they sayd one to another.
 goe to let vs make bricke and burne them thorowly.
 and they had bricke for stone and slime had they for morter.
 and they said.
 goe to let vs build vs a city and a tower whose top may reach vnto heauen and let vs make vs a name lest we be scattered abroad vpon the face of the whole earth.
 and the lord came downe to see the city and the tower which the children of men builded.
 and the lord said.
 behold the people is one and they haue all one language.
 and this they begin to doe.
 and now nothing will be restrained from them which they haue imagined to doe.
 goe to let vs go downe and there confound their language that they may not vnderstand one anothers speech.
 so the lord scattered them abroad from thence vpon the face of all the earth.
 and they left off to build the citie.
 therefore is the name of it called babel because the lord did there confound the language of all the earth.
 and from thence did the lord scatter them abroad vpon the face of all the earth.
 these are the generations of shem.
 shem was an hundred yeres old and begate arphaxad two yeeres after the flood.
 and shem liued after he begate arphaxad fiue hundred yeeres and begate sonnes and daughters.
 and arphaxad liued fiue and thirtie yeeres and begate salah.
 and arphaxad liued after he begate salah foure hundred and three yeeres and begate sonnes and daughters.
 and salah liued thirtie yeeres and begate eber.
 and salah liued after hee begate eber foure hundred and three yeeres and begate sonnes and daughters.
 and eber liued foure and thirty yeeres and begate peleg.
 and eber liued after hee begate peleg foure hundred and thirtie yeres and begate sonnes and daughters.
 and peleg liued thirtie yeeres and begate reu.
 and peleg liued after hee begate reu two hundred and nine yeeres and begate sonnes and daughters.
 and reu liued two and thirtie yeeres and begate serug.
 and reu liued after hee begate serug two hundreth and seuen yeres and begate sonnes and daughters.
 and serug liued thirtie yeeres and begate nahor.
 and serug liued after he begate nahor two hundred yeeres and begat sonnes and daughters.
 and nahor liued nine and twentie yeeres and begate terah.
 and nahor liued after he begate terah an hundred nineteene yeeres and begate sonnes and daughters.
 and terah liued seuenty yeeres and begate abram nahor haran.
 now these are the generations of terah.
 terah begate abram nahor and haran.
 and haran begate lot.
 and haran died before his father terah in the land of his natiuity in ur of the chaldees.
 and abram and nahor tooke them wiues.
 the name of abrams wife was sarai and the name of nahors wife milcah the daughter of haran the father of milcah and the father of iscah.
 but sarai was barren.
 she had no childe.
 and terah tooke abram his sonne and lot the sonne of haran his sonnes sonne and sarai his daughter in lawe his sonne abrams wife and they went foorth with them from ur of the chaldees to goe into the land of canaan.
 and they came vnto haran and dwelt there.
 and the dayes of terah were two hundred and fiue yeres.
 and terah died in haran.
 now the lord had said vnto abram get thee out of thy countrey and from thy kinred and from thy fathers house vnto a land that i will shew thee.
 and i will make of thee a great nation and i wil blesse thee and make thy name great.
 and thou shalt bee a blessing.
 and i will blesse them that blesse thee and curse him that curseth thee.
 and in thee shal all families of the earth be blessed.
 so abram departed as the lord had spoken vnto him and lot went with him.
 and abram was seuentie and fiue yeeres old when he departed out of haran.
 and abram tooke sarai his wife and lot his brothers sonne and all their substance that they had gathered and the soules that they had gotten in haran and they went foorth to goe into the land of canaan.
 and into the land of canaan they came.
 and abram passed through the land vnto the place of sichem vnto the plaine of moreh.
 and the canaanite was then in the land.
 and the lord appeared vnto abram and said unto thy seed wil i giue this land.
 and there builded hee an altar vnto the lord who appeared vnto him.
 and he remoued from thence vnto a mountaine on the east of bethel and pitched his tent hauing bethel on the west and hai on the east.
 and there hee builded an altar vnto the lord and called vpon the name of the lord.
 and abram iourneyed going on still toward the south.
 and there was a famine in the land and abram went downe into egypt to soiourne there.
 for the famine was grieuous in the land.
 and it came to passe when he was come neere to enter into egypt that he said vnto sarai his wife behold now i know that thou art a faire woman to looke vpon.
 therefore it shall come to passe when the egyptians shall see thee that they shall say this is his wife.
 and they will kill me but they will saue thee aliue.
 say i pray thee thou art my sister that it may be wel with me for thy sake.
 and my soule shall liue because of thee.
 and it came to passe that when abram was come into egypt the egyptians beheld the woman that shee was very faire.
 the princes also of pharaoh saw her and commended her before pharaoh.
 and the woman was taken into pharaohs house.
 and he entreated abram well for her sake.
 and he had sheepe and oxen and hee asses and men seruants and maid seruants and shee asses and camels.
 and the lord plagued pharaoh his house with great plagues because of sarai abrams wife.
 and pharaoh called abram and said what is this that thou hast done vnto me.
 why diddest thou not tell me that she was thy wife.
 why saidest thou shee is my sister.
 so i might haue taken her to mee to wife.
 now therfore behold thy wife take her and goe thy way.
 and pharaoh commanded his men concerning him.
 and they sent him away and his wife and all that he had.
 and abram went vp out of egypt he and his wife and all that he had and lot with him into the south.
 and abram was very rich in cattell in siluer and in gold.
 and hee went on his iourneyes from the south euen to bethel vnto the place where his tent had bene at the beginning betweene bethel and hai.
 unto the place of the altar which he had made there at the first.
 and there abram called on the name of the lord.
 and lot also which went with abram had flocks and heards tents.
 and the land was not able to beare them that they might dwell together.
 for their substance was great so that they could not dwell together.
 and there was a strife betweene the heardmen of abrams cattell and the heardmen of lots cattell.
 and the canaanite and the perizzite dwelled then in the land.
 and abram said vnto lot let there be no strife i pray thee betweene mee and thee and betweene my heardmen and thy heardmen.
 for wee bee brethren.
 is not the whole land before thee.
 separate thy selfe i pray thee from mee.
 if thou wilt take the left hand then i will goe to the right.
 or if thou depart to the right hand then i will goe to the left.
 and lot lifted vp his eyes and beheld all the plaine of iordane that it was well watered euery where before the lord destroyed sodome and gomorah euen as the garden of the lord like the land of egypt as thou commest vnto zoar.
 then lot chose him all the plaine of iordane.
 and lot iourneyed east.
 and they separated themselues the one from the other.
 abram dwelled in the land of canaan and lot dwelled in the cities of the plaine and pitched his tent toward sodome.
 but the men of sodome were wicked and sinners before the lord exceedingly.
 and the lord said vnto abram after that lot was separated from him lift vp now thine eyes and looke from the place where thou art northward and southward and eastward and westward.
 for all the land which thou seest to thee will i give it and to thy seede for euer.
 and i will make thy seede as the dust of the earth.
 so that if a man can number the dust of the earth then shall thy seed also be numbred.
 arise walke through the land in the length of it and in the breadth of it.
 for i will giue it vnto thee.
 then abram remoued his tent and came and dwelt in the plaine of mamre which is in hebron and built there an altar vnto the lord.
 and it came to passe in the dayes of amraphel king of shinar arioch king of ellasar chedorlaomer king of elam and tidal king of nations.
 that these made warre with bera king of sodome and with birsha king of gomorrah shinab king of admah and shemeber king of zeboiim and the king of bela which is zoar.
 all these were ioyned together in the vale of siddim.
 which is the salt sea.
 twelue yeeres they serued chedorlaomer and in the thirteenth yeere they rebelled.
 and in the fourteenth yeere came chedorlaomer and the kings that were with him and smote the rephaims in ashteroth karnaim the zuzims in ham and the emims in shaueh kiriathaim.
 and the horites in their mount seir vnto elparan which is by the wildernesse.
 and they returned and came to enmishpat which is kadesh smote all the countrey of the amalekites and also the amorites that dwelt in hazezontamar.
 and there went out the king of sodome and the king of gomorrah and the king of admah and the king of zeboiim and the king of bela the same is zoar and they ioyned battell with them in the vale of siddim with chedorlaomer the king of elam and with tidal king of nations and amraphel king of shinar and arioch king of ellasar.
 foure kings with fiue.
 and the vale of siddim was full of slimepits.
 and the kings of sodome gomorrah fled and fell there.
 and they that remained fled to the mountaine.
 and they tooke all the goods of sodome and gomorrah and all their victuals and went their way.
 and they tooke lot abrams brothers sonne who dwelt in sodome and his goods and departed.
 and there came one that had escaped and told abram the hebrew for hee dwelt in the plaine of mamre the amorite brother of eshcol and brother of aner.
 and these were confederate with abram.
 and when abram heard that his brother was taken captiue he armed his trained seruants borne in his owne house three hundred and eighteene and pursued them vnto dan.
 and hee diuided himselfe against them he and his seruants by night and smote them and pursued them vnto hoba which is on the left hand of damascus.
 and hee brought backe all the goods and also brought againe his brother lot and his goods and the women also and the people.
 and the king of sodome went out to meete him after his returne from the slaughter of chedorlaomer and of the kings that were with him at the valley of saueh which is the kings dale.
 and melchizedek king of salem brought foorth bread and wine.
 and he was the priest of the most high god.
 and hee blessed him and saide.
 blessed bee abram of the most high god possessour of heauen and earth and blessed bee the most high god which hath deliuered thine enemies into thy hand.
 and hee gaue him tithes of all.
 and the king of sodome said vnto abram giue me the persons and take the goods to thy selfe.
 and abram said to the king of sodome i haue lift vp my hand vnto the lord the most high god the possessour of heauen and earth that i wil not take from a threed euen to a shoe latchet and that i will not take any thing that is thine lest thou shouldest say i haue made abram rich.
 saue onely that which the yong men haue eaten and the portion of the men which went with mee aner eschol and mamre.
 let them take their portion.
 after these things the word of the lord came vnto abram in a vision saying.
 feare not abram.
 i am thy shield and thy exceeding great reward.
 and abram said lord god what wilt thou giue me seeing i goe childlesse.
 and the steward of my house is this eliezer of damascus.
 and abram said.
 behold to mee thou hast given no seed.
 and loe one borne in my house is mine heire.
 and behold the word of the lord came vnto him saying.
 this shall not be thine heire.
 but he that shall come foorth out of thy owne bowels shalbe thine heire.
 and he brought him forth abroad and said looke now towards heauen and tell the starres if thou be able to number them.
 and hee said vnto him so shall thy seed be.
 and he beleeued in the lord.
 and hee counted it to him for righteousnesse.
 and he said vnto him.
 i am the lord that brought thee out of ur of the caldees to give thee this land to inherit it.
 and he said lord god whereby shal i know that i shall inherit it.
 and he said vnto him take me an heifer of three yeeres old and a shee goat of three yeeres old and a ramme of three yeeres old and a turtle doue and a yong pigeon.
 and he tooke vnto him all these and diuided them in the midst and layd each peece one against another.
 but the birds diuided he not.
 and when the fowles came downe vpon the carcases abram droue them away.
 and when the sunne was going downe a deepe sleepe fell vpon abram.
 and loe an horrour of great darkenesse fell vpon him.
 and he said vnto abram know of a surety that thy seed shalbe a stranger in a land that is not theirs and shal serue them and they shall afflict them foure hundred yeeres.
 and also that nation whom they shall serue wil i iudge.
 and afterward shall they come out with great substance.
 and thou shalt goe to thy fathers in peace.
 thou shalt be buried in a good old age.
 but in the fourth generation they shall come hither againe.
 for the iniquitie of the amorites is not yet full.
 and it came to passe that when the sunne went downe and it was darke behold a smoking furnace and a burning lampe that passed betweene those pieces.
 in that same day the lord made a couenant with abram saying.
 unto thy seed haue i giuen this land from the riuer of egypt vnto the great riuer the riuer euphrates.
 the kenites and the kenizites and the kadmonites.
 and the hittites and the perizzites and the rephaims and the amorites and the canaanites and the girgashites and the iebusites.
 now sarai abrams wife bare him no children.
 and she had an handmaide an egyptian whose name was hagar.
 and sarai said vnto abram behold now the lord hath restrained me from bearing.
 i pray thee go in vnto my maid.
 it may bee that i may obtaine children by her.
 and abram hearkened to the voice of sarai.
 and sarai abrams wife tooke hagar her maid the egyptian after abram had dwelt ten yeeres in the land of canaan and gaue her to her husband abram to be his wife.
 and he went in vnto hagar and she conceiued.
 and when shee saw that shee had conceiued her mistresse was despised in her eyes.
 and sarai said vnto abram my wrong be vpon thee.
 i haue giuen my maid into thy bosome and when shee saw that she had conceiued i was despised in her eyes.
 the lord iudge betweene me and thee.
 but abram said vnto sarai behold thy maid is in thy hand.
 doe to her as it pleaseth thee.
 and when sarai dealt hardly with her shee fled from her face.
 and the angel of the lord found her by a fountaine of water in the wildernesse by the fountaine in the way to shur.
 and he said hagar sarais maid whence camest thou.
 and whither wilt thou goe.
 and she said i flee from the face of my mistresse sarai.
 and the angel of the lord said vnto her returne to thy mistresse and submit thy selfe vnder her hands.
 and the angel of the lord said vnto her i will multiply thy seede exceedingly that it shall not be numbred for multitude.
 and the angel of the lord said vnto her behold thou art with child and shalt beare a sonne and shalt call his name ishmael.
 because the lord hath heard thy affliction.
 and he will be a wilde man.
 his hand will be against euery man and euery mans hand against him.
 he shal dwell in the presence of all his brethren.
 and shee called the name of the lord that spake vnto her thou god seest me.
 for she said haue i also here looked after him that seeth me.
 wherefore the well was called beerlahairoi.
 behold it is betweene cadesh and bered.
 and hagar bare abram a sonne.
 and abram called his sonnes name which hagar bare ishmael.
 and abram was fourescore and sixe yeeres old when hagar bare ishmael to abram.
 and when abram was ninetie yeres old and nine the lord appeared to abram and said vnto him i am the almightie god walke before me and be thou perfect.
 and i wil make my couenant betweene me and thee and will multiply thee exceedingly.
 and abram fell on his face and god talked with him saying as for me behold my couenant is with thee and thou shalt be a father of many nations.
 neither shall thy name any more be called abram but thy name shall bee abraham.
 for a father of many nations haue i made thee.
 and i will make thee exceeding fruitfull and i will make nations of thee and kings shall come out of thee.
 and i will establish my couenant betweene me and thee and thy seede after thee in their generations for an euerlasting couenant to bee a god vnto thee and to thy seed after thee.
 and i will giue vnto thee and to thy seed after thee the land wherein thou art a stranger all the land of canaan for an euerlasting possession and i will be their god.
 and god said vnto abraham thou shalt keepe my couenant therefore thou and thy seede after thee in their generations.
 this is my couenant which yee shall keepe betweene me and you and thy seed after thee.
 euery man child among you shall be circumcised.
 and ye shall circumcise the flesh of your foreskinne.
 and it shal be a token of the couenant betwixt me and you.
 and he that is eight dayes olde shalbe circumcised among you euery man child in your generations he that is borne in the house or bought with money of any stranger which is not of thy seed.
 he that is borne in thy house and he that is bought with thy money must needs be circumcised.
 and my couenant shall be in your flesh for an euerlasting couenant.
 and the vncircumcised manchild whose flesh of his foreskinne is not circumcised that soule shall be cut off from his people.
 hee hath broken my couenant.
 and god said vnto abraham as for sarai thy wife thou shalt not call her name sarai but sarah shall her name be.
 and i will blesse her and giue thee a sonne also of her.
 yea i wil blesse her and she shalbe a mother of nations.
 kings of people shall be of her.
 then abraham fell vpon his face and laughed and said in his heart shall a child be borne vnto him that is an hundred yeeres old.
 and shal sarah that is ninetie yeeres old beare.
 and abraham said vnto god o that ishmael might liue before thee.
 and god said sarah thy wife shall beare thee a sonne in deede and thou shalt call his name isaac.
 and i will establish my couenant with him for an euerlasting couenant and with his seed after him.
 and as for ishmael i haue heard thee.
 behold i haue blessed him and will make him fruitfull and will multiplie him exceedingly.
 twelue princes shall he beget and i will make him a great nation.
 but my couenant wil i establish with isaac which sarah shall beare vnto thee at this set time in the next yeere.
 and he left off talking with him and god went vp from abraham.
 and abraham tooke ishmael his sonne and all that were borne in his house and all that were bought with his money euery male among the men of abrahams house and circumcised the flesh of their foreskinne in the selfesame day as god had said vnto him.
 and abraham was ninety yeeres old and nine when he was circumcised in the flesh of his foreskinne.
 and ishmael his sonne was thirteene yeeres old when he was circumcised in the flesh of his foreskinne.
 in the selfe same day was abraham circumcised and ishmael his sonne.
 and all the men of his house borne in the house and bought with money of the stranger were circumcised with him.
 and the lord appeared vnto him in the plaines of mamre.
 and he sate in the tent doore in the heat of the day.
 and he lift vp his eyes and looked and loe three men stood by him.
 and when he saw them hee ranne to meete them from the tent doore and bowed himselfe toward the ground and said my lord if now i haue found fauour in thy sight passe not away i pray thee from thy seruant.
 let a little water i pray you be fetched and wash your feete and rest your selues vnder the tree.
 and i will fetch a morsell of bread.
 and comfort ye your hearts after that you shall passe on.
 for therefore are you come to your seruant.
 and they said.
 so doe as thou hast said.
 and abraham hastened into the tent vnto sarah said.
 make ready quickly three measures of fine meale knead it and make cakes vpon the hearth.
 and abraham ranne vnto the heard and fetcht a calfe tender and good and gaue it vnto a yong man.
 and he hasted to dresse it.
 and he tooke butter and milke and the calfe which he had dressed and set it before them.
 and he stood by them vnder the tree.
 and they did eate.
 and they said vnto him where is sarah thy wife.
 and he said behold in the tent.
 and he said i will certainly returne vnto thee according to the time of life.
 and loe sarah thy wife shall haue a sonne.
 and sarah heard it in the tent doore which was behind him.
 now abraham and sarah were old and well stricken in age.
 and it ceased to be with sarah after the maner of women.
 therefore sarah laughed within her selfe saying after i am waxed old shall i haue pleasure my lord being old also.
 and the lord said vnto abraham wherefore did sarah laugh saying.
 shall i of a surety beare a childe which am old.
 is any thing too hard for the lord.
 at the time appointed will i returne vnto thee according to the time of life and sarah shall haue a sonne.
 then sarah denied saying i laughed not.
 for she was afraid.
 and he said nay but thou diddest laugh.
 and the men rose vp from thence and looked toward sodome.
 and abraham went with them to bring them on the way.
 and the lord said shall i hide from abraham that thing which i doe.
 seeing that abraham shall surely become a great and mighty nation and all the nations of the earth shall be blessed in him.
 for i know him that hee will command his children and his household after him and they shall keepe the way of the lord to doe iustice and iudgement that the lord may bring vpon abraham that which hee hath spoken of him.
 and the lord said because the cry of sodome and gomorrah is great and because their sinne is very grieuous.
 i will goe downe now and see whether they haue done altogether according to the cry of it which is come vnto me.
 and if not i will know.
 and the men turned their faces from thence and went toward sodome.
 but abraham stood yet before the lord.
 and abraham drew neere and said wilt thou also destroy the righteous with the wicked.
 peraduenture there be fifty righteous within the citie.
 wilt thou also destroy and not spare the place for the fiftie righteous that are therein.
 that be farre from thee to do after this maner to slay the righteous with the wicked and that the righteous should be as the wicked that be farre from thee.
 shall not the iudge of all the earth doe right.
 and the lord said if i find in sodom fiftie righteous within the citie then i will spare all the place for their sakes.
 and abraham answered and said behold now i haue taken vpon me to speake vnto the lord which am but dust and ashes.
 peraduenture there shall lacke fiue of the fiftie righteous.
 wilt thou destroy all the citie for lacke of fiue.
 and he said if i find there fourtie and fiue i will not destroy it.
 and hee spake vnto him yet againe and said peraduenture there shall be fourtie found there.
 and he said i will not doe it for fourties sake.
 and he said vnto him oh let not the lord be angry and i will speake.
 peraduenture there shall thirtie bee found there.
 and he said i will not doe it if i find thirtie there.
 and he said behold now i haue taken vpon mee to speake vnto the lord.
 peraduenture there shall bee twenty found there.
 and he said i will not destroy it for twenties sake.
 and hee saide oh let not the lord be angry and i will speake yet but this once.
 peraduenture ten shall be found there.
 and he said i will not destroy it for tennes sake.
 and the lord went his way assoone as hee had left communing with abraham.
 and abraham returned vnto his place.
 and there came two angels to sodome at euen and lot sate in the gate of sodome.
 and lot seeing them rose vp to meet them and he bowed himselfe with his face toward the ground.
 and he said beholde now my lords turne in i pray you into your seruants house and tarie all night and wash your feete and ye shall rise vp early and goe on your wayes.
 and they said nay.
 but we wil abide in the street all night.
 and he pressed vpon them greatly and they turned in vnto him and entred into his house.
 and he made them a feast and did bake vnleauened bread and they did eate.
 but before they lay downe the men of the citie euen the men of sodom compassed the house round both old and yong all the people from euery quarter.
 and they called vnto lot and said vnto him where are the men which came in to thee this night.
 bring them out vnto vs that we may know them.
 and lot went out at the doore vnto them shut the doore after him and said i pray you brethren doe not so wickedly.
 behold now i haue two daughters which haue not knowen man.
 let mee i pray you bring them out vnto you and doe ye to them as is good in your eyes.
 onely vnto these men do nothing.
 for therefore came they vnder the shadow of my roofe.
 and they said stand backe.
 and they said againe this one fellow came in to soiourne and he will needs bee a iudge.
 now wil we deale worse with thee then with them.
 and they pressed sore vpon the man euen lot and came neere to breake the doore.
 but the men put forth their hand and pulled lot into the house to them and shut to the doore.
 and they smote the men that were at the doore of the house with blindnes both small and great.
 so that they wearied themselues to finde the doore.
 and the men said vnto lot hast thou here any besides.
 sonne in law and thy sonnes and thy daughters and whatsoeuer thou hast in the citie bring them out of this place.
 for we will destroy this place because the crie of them is waxen great before the face of the lord.
 and the lord hath sent vs to destroy it.
 and lot went out and spake vnto his sonnes in law which married his daughters and said up get yee out of this place.
 for the lord wil destroy this citie.
 but hee seemed as one that mocked vnto his sonnes in law.
 and when the morning arose then the angels hastened lot saying arise take thy wife thy two daughters which are here lest thou be consumed in the iniquitie of the citie.
 and while he lingred the men laid hold vpon his hand and vpon the hand of his wife and vpon the hand of his two daughters the lord being mercifull vnto him.
 and they brought him forth and set him without the citie.
 and it came to passe when they had brought them forth abroad that he said escape for thy life looke not behind thee neither stay thou in all the plaine.
 escape to the mountaine lest thou bee consumed.
 and lot said vnto them oh not so my lord.
 beholde now thy seruant hath found grace in thy sight and thou hast magnified thy mercy which thou hast shewed vnto me in sauing my life and i cannot escape to the mountaine lest some euill take me and i die.
 behold now this citie is neere to flee vnto and it is a litle one.
 oh let me escape thither is it not a litle one.
 and my soule shall liue.
 and he said vnto him see i haue accepted thee concerning this thing that i will not ouerthrow this citie for the which thou hast spoken.
 haste thee escape thither.
 for i cannot doe any thing till thou bee come thither.
 therefore the name of the citie was called zoar.
 the sunne was risen vpon the earth when lot entred into zoar.
 then the lord rained vpon sodome vpon gomorrah brimstone and fire from the lord out of heauen.
 and he ouerthrew those cities and all the plaine and all the inhabitants of the cities and that which grew vpon the ground.
 but his wife looked backe from behind him and she became a pillar of salt.
 and abraham gate vp earely in the morning to the place where hee stood before the lord.
 and he looked toward sodome and gomorrah toward all the land of the plaine and beheld and loe the smoke of the countrey went vp as the smoke of a furnace.
 and it came to passe when god destroyed the cities of the plaine that god remembred abraham and sent lot out of the midst of the ouerthrow when he ouerthrew the cities in the which lot dwelt.
 and lot went vp out of zoar and dwelt in the mountaine and his two daughters with him.
 for hee feared to dwell in zoar and he dwelt in a caue he and his two daughters.
 and the first borne saide vnto the yonger our father is old and there is not a man in the earth to come in vnto vs after the maner of all the earth.
 come let vs make our father drinke wine and we will lye with him that we may preserue seed of our father.
 and they made their father drinke wine that night the first borne went in and lay with her father.
 and he perceiued not when shee lay downe nor when she arose.
 and it came to passe on the morrow that the first borne said vnto the yonger behold i lay yesternight with my father.
 let vs make him drinke wine this night also and goe thou in and lye with him that we may preserue seed of our father.
 and they made their father drinke wine that night also and the yonger arose and lay with him.
 and he perceiued not when she lay downe nor when she arose.
 thus were both the daughters of lot with childe by their father.
 and the first borne bare a sonne and called his name moab.
 the same is the father of the moabites vnto this day.
 and the yonger she also bare a sonne and called his name benammi.
 the same is the father of the children of ammon vnto this day.
 and abraham iourneyed from thence toward the southcountrey and dwelled betweene cadesh and shur and soiourned in gerar.
 and abraham said of sarah his wife she is my sister.
 and abimelech king of gerar sent and tooke sarah.
 but god came to abimelech in a dreame by night and said to him behold thou art but a dead man for the woman which thou hast taken.
 for shee is a mans wife.
 but abimelech had not come neere her.
 and he said lord wilt thou slay also a righteous nation.
 said he not vnto me she is my sister.
 and she euen she herselfe said hee is my brother.
 in the integritie of my heart and innocencie of my hands haue i done this.
 and god saide vnto him in a dreame yea i know that thou didst this in the integritie of thy heart.
 for i also withheld thee from sinning against mee therefore suffered i thee not to touch her.
 now therefore restore the man his wife.
 for he is a prophet and he shal pray for thee and thou shalt liue.
 and if thou restore her not know thou that thou shalt surely die thou and all that are thine.
 therefore abimelech rose earely in the morning and called all his seruants and told all these things in their eares.
 and the men were sore afraid.
 then abimelech called abraham and said vnto him what hast thou done vnto vs.
 and what haue i offended thee that thou hast brought on me and on my kingdome a great sinne.
 thou hast done deeds vnto mee that ought not to be done.
 and abimelech said vnto abraham what sawest thou that thou hast done this thing.
 and abraham said because i thought surely the feare of god is not in this place.
 and they will slay mee for my wiues sake.
 and yet indeed shee is my sister.
 she is the daughter of my father but not the daughter of my mother.
 and shee became my wife.
 and it came to passe when god caused me to wander from my fathers house that i said vnto her this is thy kindnesse which thou shalt shew vnto me.
 at euery place whither wee shall come say of me he is my brother.
 and abimelech tooke sheepe and oxen and menseruants and women seruants and gaue them vnto abraham and restored him sarah his wife.
 and abimelech said behold my land is before thee.
 dwel where it pleaseth thee.
 and vnto sarah hee said behold i haue giuen thy brother a thousand pieces of siluer.
 behold he is to thee a couering of the eyes vnto all that are with thee and with all other.
 thus shee was reproued.
 so abraham prayed vnto god.
 and god healed abimelech and his wife and his maidseruants and they bare children.
 for the lord had fast closed vp all the wombes of the house of abimelech because of sarah abrahams wife.
 and the lord visited sarah as he had said and the lord did vnto sarah as he had spoken.
 for sarah conceiued and bare abraham a sonne in his old age at the set time of which god had spoken to him.
 and abraham called the name of his sonne that was borne vnto him whom sarah bare to him isaac.
 and abraham circumcised his sonne isaac being eight dayes old as god had commanded him.
 and abraham was an hundred yeeres old when his sonne isaac was borne vnto him.
 and sarah said god hath made me to laugh so that all that heare will laugh with me.
 and she said who would haue said vnto abraham that sarah should haue giuen children sucke.
 for i haue borne him a sonne in his old age.
 and the child grew and was weaned.
 and abraham made a great feast the same day that isaac was weaned.
 and sarah saw the sonne of hagar the egyptian which shee had borne vnto abraham mocking.
 wherfore she said vnto abraham cast out this bond woman and her sonne.
 for the sonne of this bond woman shall not be heire with my sonne euen with isaac.
 and the thing was very grieuous in abrahams sight because of his sonne.
 and god said vnto abraham let it not be grieuous in thy sight because of the lad and because of thy bond woman.
 in all that sarah hath said vnto thee hearken vnto her voice.
 for in isaac shall thy seed be called.
 and also of the sonne of the bond woman will i make a nation because he is thy seed.
 and abraham rose vp earely in the morning and tooke bread and a bottle of water and gaue it vnto hagar putting it on her shoulder and the child and sent her away.
 and shee departed and wandered in the wildernesse of beersheba.
 and the water was spent in the bottle and shee cast the child vnder one of the shrubs.
 and she went and sate her downe ouer against him a good way off as it were a bow shoot.
 for she said let me not see the death of the child.
 and shee sate ouer against him and lift vp her voice and wept.
 and god heard the voice of the lad and the angel of god called to hagar out of heauen and said vnto her what aileth thee hagar.
 feare not.
 for god hath heard the voice of the ladde where he is.
 arise lift vp the lad and hold him in thine hand.
 for i will make him a great nation.
 and god opened her eyes and she saw a well of water and shee went and filled the bottle with water and gaue the lad drinke.
 and god was with the lad and he grew and dwelt in the wildernesse and became an archer.
 and hee dwelt in the wildernesse of paran.
 and his mother tooke him a wife out of the land of egypt.
 and it came to passe at that time that abimelech and phichol the chiefe captaine of his hoste spake vnto abraham saying god is with thee in all that thou doest.
 now therefore sweare vnto mee here by god that thou wilt not deale falsly with me nor with my sonne nor with my sonnes sonne.
 but according to the kindnesse that i haue done vnto thee thou shalt doe vnto me and to the land wherein thou hast soiourned.
 and abraham saide i will sweare.
 and abraham reproued abimelech because of a well of water which abimelechs seruants had violently taken away.
 and abimelech saide i wote not who hath done this thing.
 neither didst thou tell me neither yet heard i of it but to day.
 and abraham tooke sheepe and oxen and gaue them vnto abimelech.
 and both of them made a couenant.
 and abraham set seuen ewe lambes of the flocke by themselues.
 and abimelech said vnto abraham what meane these seuen ewe lambes which thou hast set by themselues.
 and he said for these seuen ewe lambs shalt thou take of my hand that they may be a witnesse vnto me that i haue digged this well.
 wherefore he called that place beersheba.
 because there they sware both of them.
 thus they made a couenant at beeersheba.
 then abimelech rose vp and phichol the chiefe captaine of his hoste and they returned into the land of the philistines.
 and abraham planted a groue in beersheba and called there on the name of the lord the euerlasting god.
 and abraham soiourned in the philistines land many dayes.
 and it came to passe after these things that god did tempt abraham and said vnto him abraham.
 and hee said beholde heere i am.
 and he said take now thy sonne thine onely sonne isaac whom thou louest and get thee into the land of moriah.
 and offer him there for a burnt offering vpon one of the mountaines which i will tell thee of.
 and abraham rose vp earely in the morning and sadled his asse and tooke two of his yong men with him and isaac his sonne and claue the wood for the burnt offering and rose vp and went vnto the place of which god had told him.
 then on the third day abraham lift vp his eyes and saw the place afarre off.
 and abraham said vnto his yong men abide you here with the asse and i and the lad will goe yonder and worship and come againe to you.
 and abraham tooke the wood of the burnt offering and layd it vpon isaac his sonne.
 and he tooke the fire in his hand and a knife.
 and they went both of them together.
 and isaac spake vnto abraham his father and said my father.
 and he said here am i my sonne.
 and hee said behold the fire and wood.
 but where is the lambe for a burnt offring.
 and abraham said my sonne god will prouide himselfe a lambe for a burnt offering.
 so they went both of them together.
 and they came to the place which god had tolde him of and abraham built an altar there and layd the wood in order and bound isaac his sonne and layde him on the altar vpon the wood.
 and abraham stretched foorth his hand and tooke the knife to slay his sonne.
 and the angel of the lord called vnto him out of heauen and said abraham abraham.
 and he said here am i.
 and he said lay not thine hand vpon the lad neither do thou any thing vnto him.
 for now i know that thou fearest god seeing thou hast not withhelde thy sonne thine onely sonne from mee.
 and abraham lifted vp his eyes and looked and beholde behinde him a ramme caught in a thicket by his hornes.
 and abraham went and tooke the ramme and offered him vp for a burnt offering in the stead of his sonne.
 and abraham called the name of that place iehouahijreh as it is said to this day in the mount of the lord it shalbe seene.
 and the angel of the lord called vnto abraham out of heauen the second time and said by my selfe haue i sworne saith the lord for because thou hast done this thing and hast not withheld thy sonne thine onely sonne that in blessing i will blesse thee and in multiplying i will multiply thy seed as the starres of the heauen and as the sand which is vpon the sea shore and thy seed shall possesse the gate of his enemies.
 and in thy seed shall all the nations of the earth be blessed because thou hast obeyed my voice.
 so abraham returned vnto his yong men and they rose vp and went together to beersheba and abraham dwelt at beersheba.
 and it came to passe after these things that it was told abraham saying behold milcah shee hath also borne children vnto thy brother nahor huz his first borne and buz his brother and kemuel the father of aram and chesed and hazo and pildash and iidlaph and bethuel.
 and bethuel begate rebekah.
 these eight milcah did beare to nahor abrahams brother.
 and his concubine whose name was reumah she bare also tebah and gaham and thahash and maachah.
 and sarah was an hundred and seuen and twenty yeeres olde.
 these were the yeeres of the life of sarah.
 and sarah died in kiriath arba the same is hebron in the land of canaan.
 and abraham came to mourne for sarah and to weepe for her.
 and abraham stood vp from before his dead spake vnto the sonnes of heth saying i am a stranger and a soiourner with you.
 giue me a possession of a burying place with you that i may bury my dead out of my sight.
 and the children of heth answered abraham saying vnto him heare vs my lord thou art a mightie prince amongst vs.
 in the choise of our sepulchres bury thy dead.
 none of vs shall withhold from thee his sepulchre but that thou mayest bury thy dead.
 and abraham stood vp and bowed himselfe to the people of the land euen to the children of heth.
 and hee communed with them saying if it be your mind that i should bury my dead out of my sight heare me and entreat for me to ephron the sonne of zohar.
 that he may giue me the caue of machpelah which he hath which is in the end of his field.
 for as much money as it is worth he shall giue it mee for a possession of a burying place amongst you.
 and ephron dwelt amongst the children of heth.
 and ephron the hittite answered abraham in the audience of the children of heth euen of all that went in at the gates of his citie saying nay my lord heare mee.
 the field giue i thee and the caue that is therein i giue it thee in the presence of the sonnes of my people giue i it thee.
 bury thy dead.
 and abraham bowed downe himselfe before the people of the land.
 and he spake vnto ephron in the audience of the people of the land saying but if thou wilt giue it i pray thee heare mee.
 i will giue thee money for the field.
 take it of me and i will bury my dead there.
 and ephron answered abraham saying vnto him my lord hearken vnto mee.
 the land is worth foure hundred shekels of siluer.
 what is that betwixt mee and thee.
 bury therefore thy dead.
 and abraham hearkened vnto ephron and abraham weighed to ephron the siluer which he had named in the audience of the sonnes of heth foure hundred shekels of siluer currant money with the merchant.
 and the field of ephron which was in machpelah which was before mamre the fielde and the caue which was therein and all the trees that were in the field that were in all the borders round about were made sure unto abraham for a possession in the presence of the children of heth before all that went in at the gates of his citie.
 and after this abraham buried sarah his wife in the caue of the field of machpelah before mamre.
 the same is hebron in the land of canaan.
 and the field and the caue that is therein were made sure vnto abraham for a possession of a burying place by the sonnes of heth.
 and abraham was olde and well stricken in age.
 and the lord had blessed abraham in all things.
 and abraham said vnto his eldest seruant of his house that ruled ouer all that he had put i pray thee thy hand vnder my thigh.
 and i will make thee sweare by the lord the god of heauen and the god of the earth that thou shalt not take a wife vnto my sonne of the daughters of the canaanites amongst whom i dwell.
 but thou shalt go vnto my countrey and to my kinred and take a wife vnto my sonne isaac.
 and the seruant said vnto him peraduenture the woman will not bee willing to follow mee vnto this land.
 must i needes bring thy sonne againe vnto the land from whence thou camest.
 and abraham said vnto him beware thou that thou bring not my sonne thither againe.
 the lord god of heauen which tooke mee from my fathers house and from the land of my kindred and which spake vnto mee and that sware vnto me saying unto thy seed will i giue this land he shall send his angel before thee and thou shalt take a wife vnto my sonne from thence.
 and if the woman wil not be willing to follow thee then thou shalt bee cleare from this my othe.
 onely bring not my sonne thither againe.
 and the seruant put his hand vnder the thigh of abraham his master and sware to him concerning that matter.
 and the seruant tooke ten camels of the camels of his master and departed for all the goods of his master were in his hand and he arose and went to mesopotamia vnto the citie of nahor.
 and he made his camels to kneele downe without the citie by a well of water at the time of the euening euen the time that women goe out to draw water.
 and he said o lord god of my master abraham i pray thee send me good speed this day and shew kindnesse vnto my master abraham.
 behold i stand here by the well of water.
 and the daughters of the men of the citie come out to draw water.
 and let it come to passe that the damsell to whom i shall say let downe thy pitcher i pray thee that i may drinke and she shall say drinke and i will giue thy camels drinke also.
 let the same be shee that thou hast appointed for thy seruant isaac.
 and thereby shall i know that thou hast shewed kindnesse vnto my master.
 and it came to passe before hee had done speaking that behold rebekah came out who was borne to bethuel sonne of milcah the wife of nahor abrahams brother with her pitcher vpon her shoulder.
 and the damsell was very faire to looke vpon a virgine neither had any man knowen her.
 and shee went downe to the wel and filled her pitcher and came vp.
 and the seruant ranne to meete her and said let mee i pray thee drinke a little water of thy pitcher.
 and she said drinke my lord.
 and she hasted and let downe her pitcher vpon her hand and gaue him drinke.
 and when shee had done giuing him drinke she said i will draw water for thy camels also vntill they haue done drinking.
 and she hasted and emptied her pitcher into the trough and ranne againe vnto the well to draw water and drew for all his camels.
 and the man wondering at her helde his peace to wit whether the lord had made his iourney prosperous or not.
 and it came to passe as the camels had done drinking that the man tooke a golden earering of halfe a shekel weight two bracelets for her handes of ten shekels weight of gold and said whose daughter art thou.
 tell mee i pray thee.
 is there roome in thy fathers house for vs to lodge in.
 and she said vnto him i am the daughter of bethuel the sonne of milcah which she bare vnto nahor.
 she said moreouer vnto him we haue both straw prouender ynough and roome to lodge in.
 and the man bowed downe his head and worshipped the lord.
 and hee saide blessed bee the lord god of my master abraham who hath not left destitute my master of his mercy and his trueth.
 i being in the way the lord led me to the house of my masters brethren.
 and the damsell ranne and told them of her mothers house these things.
 and rebekah had a brother and his name was laban.
 and laban ranne out vnto the man vnto the well.
 and it came to passe when he saw the earering and bracelets vpon his sisters hands and when hee heard the wordes of rebekah his sister saying thus spake the man vnto me that he came vnto the man.
 and behold hee stood by the camels at the well.
 and he said come in thou blessed of the lord wherefore standest thou without.
 for i haue prepared the house and roome for the camels.
 and the man came into the house.
 and he vngirded his camels and gaue straw and prouender for the camels and water to wash his feet and the mens feet that were with him.
 and there was set meat before him to eate.
 but he said i will not eate vntill i haue tolde mine errand.
 and hee said speake on.
 and he said i am abrahams seruant.
 and the lord hath blessed my master greatly and hee is become great.
 and hee hath giuen him flocks and heards and siluer and gold and men seruants and mayd seruants and camels and asses.
 and sarah my masters wife bare a sonne to my master when shee was old.
 and vnto him hath hee giuen all that he hath.
 and my master made me sweare saying thou shalt not take a wife to my sonne of the daughters of the canaanites in whose land i dwell.
 but thou shalt goe vnto my fathers house and to my kinred and take a wife vnto my sonne.
 and i said vnto my master peraduenture the woman will not followe me.
 and hee saide vnto me the lord before whom i walke will send his angel with thee and prosper thy way.
 and thou shalt take a wife for my sonne of my kinred and of my fathers house.
 then shalt thou bee cleare from this my oath when thou commest to my kinred and if they giue not thee one thou shalt be cleare from my oath.
 and i came this day vnto the well and said o lord god of my master abraham if now thou doe prosper my way which i goe.
 behold i stand by the well of water.
 and it shall come to passe that when the virgine commeth foorth to draw water and i say to her giue me i pray thee a litle water of thy pitcher to drinke.
 and she say to me both drinke thou and i will also draw for thy camels.
 let the same be the woman whom the lord hath appointed out for my masters sonne.
 and before i had done speaking in mine heart behold rebekah came forth with her pitcher on her shoulder.
 and she went downe vnto the well and drew water.
 and i said vnto her let me drinke i pray thee.
 and she made haste let downe her pitcher from her shoulder and saide drinke and i will giue thy camels drinke also.
 so i dranke and she made the camels drinke also.
 and i asked her and said whose daughter art thou.
 and she said the daughter of bethuel nahors sonne whom milcah bare vnto him.
 and i put the earering vpon her face and the bracelets vpon her hands.
 and i bowed downe my head and worshipped the lord and blessed the lord god of my master abraham which had led mee in the right way to take my masters brothers daughter vnto his sonne.
 and now if you wil deale kindly and truely with my master tell me.
 and if not tell me that i may turne to the right hand or to the left.
 then laban and bethuel answered and said the thing proceedeth from the lord.
 we cannot speake vnto thee bad or good.
 behold rebekah is before thee take her and goe and let her be thy masters sonnes wife as the lord hath spoken.
 and it came to passe that when abrahams seruant heard their words he worshipped the lord bowing himselfe to the earth.
 and the seruant brought foorth iewels of siluer and iewels of gold and raiment and gaue them to rebekah.
 he gaue also to her brother and to her mother precious things.
 and they did eate and drinke he and the men that were with him and taried all night and they rose vp in the morning and he said send me away vnto my master.
 and her brother and her mother said let the damsell abide with vs a few dayes at the least ten.
 after that she shall goe.
 and he said vnto them hinder me not seeing the lord hath prospered my way.
 send me away that i may goe to my master.
 and they said wee will call the damsell and enquire at her mouth.
 and they called rebekah and said vnto her wilt thou go with this man.
 and she said i will goe.
 and they sent away rebekah their sister and her nurse and abrahams seruant and his men.
 and they blessed rebekah and said vnto her thou art our sister bee thou the mother of thousands of millions and let thy seed possesse the gate of those which hate them.
 and rebekah arose and her damsels they rode vpon the camels and followed the man.
 and the seruant tooke rebekah and went his way.
 and isaac came from the way of the well lahairoi for he dwelt in the south countrey.
 and isaac went out to meditate in the field at the euentide.
 and hee lift vp his eyes and saw and behold the camels were comming.
 and rebekah lift vp her eyes and when she saw isaac she lighted off the camel.
 for she had said vnto the seruant what man is this that walketh in the field to meet vs.
 and the seruant had said it is my master.
 therefore shee tooke a vaile and couered her selfe.
 and the seruant tolde isaac all things that he had done.
 and isaac brought her into his mother sarahs tent and tooke rebekah and she became his wife and he loued her.
 and isaac was comforted after his mothers death.
 then againe abraham tooke a wife her name was keturah.
 and shee bare him zimran and iokshan and medan and midian and ishbak and shuah.
 and iokshan begat sheba and dedan.
 and the sonnes of dedan were asshurim and letushim and leummim.
 and the sonnes of midian ephah and epher and hanoch and abida and eldaah.
 all these were the children of keturah.
 and abraham gaue all that he had vnto isaac.
 but vnto the sonnes of the concubines which abraham had abraham gaue gifts and sent them away from isaac his sonne while he yet liued eastward vnto the east country.
 and these are the dayes of the yeres of abrahams life which he liued.
 an hundred threescore fifteene yeeres.
 then abraham gaue vp the ghost and died in a good old age an old man and full of yeeres and was gathered to his people.
 and his sonnes isaac and ishmael buried him in the caue of machpelah in the field of ephron the sonne of zohar the hittite which is before mamre.
 the field which abraham purchased of the sonnes of heth.
 there was abraham buried and sarah his wife.
 and it came to passe after the death of abraham that god blessed his sonne isaac and isaac dwelt by the well lahairoi.
 now these are the generations of ishmael abrahams sonne whom hagar the egyptian sarahs handmayd bare vnto abraham.
 and these are the names of the sonnes of ishmael by their names according to their generations.
 the first borne of ishmael nebaioth and kedar and adbeel and mibsam and mishma and dumah and massa hadar and tema ietur naphish and kedemah.
 these are the sonnes of ishmael and these are their names by their townes and by their castels.
 twelue princes according to their nations.
 and these are the yeeres of the life of ishmael.
 an hundred and thirty and seuen yeeres.
 and he gaue vp the ghost and died and was gathered vnto his people.
 and they dwelt from hauilah vnto shur that is before egypt as thou goest towards assyria.
 and hee died in the presence of all his brethren.
 and these are the generations of isaac abrahams sonne.
 abraham begate isaac.
 and isaac was fortie yeeres old when hee tooke rebekah to wife the daughter of bethuel the syrian of padan aram the sister to laban the syrian.
 and isaac intreated the lord for his wife because she was barren.
 and the lord was intreated of him and rebekah his wife conceiued.
 and the children struggled together within her.
 and she said if it be so why am i thus.
 and shee went to enquire of the lord.
 and the lord said vnto her two nations are in thy wombe and two maner of people shall be separated from thy bowels.
 and the one people shalbe stronger then the other people.
 and the elder shall serue the yonger.
 and when her dayes to be deliuered were fulfilled behold there were twinnes in her wombe.
 and the first came out red all ouer like an hairy garment.
 and they called his name esau.
 and after that came his brother out and his hand tooke holde on esaus heele.
 and his name was called iacob.
 and isaac was threescore yeres old when shee bare them.
 and the boyes grew.
 and esau was a cunning hunter a man of the fielde.
 and iacob was a plaine man dwelling in tents.
 and isaac loued esau because he did eate of his venison.
 but rebekah loued iacob.
 and iacob sod pottage.
 and esau came from the field and hee was faint.
 and esau said to iacob feed me i pray thee with that same red pottage.
 for i am faint.
 therefore was his name called edom.
 and iacob said sell me this day thy birthright.
 and esau said behold i am at the point to die.
 and what profit shall this birthright doe to me.
 and iacob said sweare to mee this day.
 and he sware to him.
 and he sold his birthright vnto iacob.
 then iacob gaue esau bread and pottage of lentiles.
 and he did eate and drinke and rose up and went his way.
 thus esau despised his birthright.
 and there was a famine in the land besides the first famine that was in the dayes of abraham.
 and isaac went vnto abimelech king of the philistims vnto gerar.
 and the lord appeared vnto him and said goe not downe into egypt.
 dwell in the land which i shall tell thee of.
 soiourne in this land and i wil be with thee and will blesse thee.
 for vnto thee and vnto thy seed i will giue all these countreys and i wil performe the othe which i sware vnto abraham thy father.
 and i wil make thy seed to multiply as the starres of heauen and will giue vnto thy seed all these countreys.
 and in thy seed shall all the nations of the earth be blessed.
 because that abraham obeyed my voyce and kept my charge my commandements my statutes and my lawes.
 and isaac dwelt in gerar.
 and the men of the place asked him of his wife.
 and he said she is my sister.
 for he feared to say she is my wife.
 lest said he the men of the place should kill me for rebekah because shee was faire to looke vpon.
 and it came to passe when he had bene there a long time that abimelech king of the philistims looked out at a window and saw and behold isaac was sporting with rebekah his wife.
 and abimelech called isaac and said behold of a suretie she is thy wife.
 and how saidst thou she is my sister.
 and isaac said vnto him because i said lest i die for her.
 and abimelech said what is this thou hast done vnto vs.
 one of the people might lightly haue lien with thy wife and thou shouldest haue brought guiltinesse vpon vs.
 and abimelech charged all his people saying hee that toucheth this man or his wife shall surely bee put to death.
 then isaac sowed in that land and receiued in the same yeere an hundred fold.
 the lord blessed him.
 and the man waxed great and went forward and grew vntill he became very great.
 for he had possession of flocks and possession of heards and great store of seruants and the philistims enuied him.
 for all the wels which his fathers seruants had digged in the dayes of abraham his father the philistims had stopped them filled them with earth.
 and abimelech said vnto isaac goe from vs.
 for thou art much mightier then we.
 and isaac departed thence and pitched his tent in the valley of gerar and dwelt there.
 and isaac digged againe the wels of water which they had digged in the dayes of abraham his father.
 for the philistims had stopped them after the death of abraham and he called their names after the names by which his father had called them.
 and isaacs seruants digged in the valley and found there a well of springing water.
 and the heardmen of gerar did striue with isaacs heardmen saying the water is ours.
 and hee called the name of the well esek because they stroue with him.
 and they digged another well and stroue for that also.
 and hee called the name of it sitnah.
 and he remoued from thence and digged another well and for that they stroue not.
 and he called the name of it rehoboth.
 and he said for now the lord hath made roome for vs and we shall be fruitfull in the land.
 and he went vp from thence to beersheba.
 and the lord appeared vnto him the same night and saide i am the god of abraham thy father.
 feare not for i am with thee and will blesse thee and multiply thy seede for my seruant abrahams sake.
 and he builded an altar there and called vpon the name of the lord and pitched his tent there.
 and there isaacs seruants digged a well.
 then abimelech went to him from gerar and ahuzzath one of his friends and phichol the chiefe captaine of his armie.
 and isaac saide vnto them wherefore come ye to me seeing ye hate me and haue sent me away from you.
 and they said we saw certainly that the lord was with thee.
 and wee said let there be now an othe betwixt vs euen betwixt vs and thee and let vs make a couenant with thee that thou wilt doe vs no hurt as we haue not touched thee and as we haue done vnto thee nothing but good and haue sent thee away in peace.
 thou art now the blessed of the lord.
 and he made them a feast and they did eate and drinke.
 and they rose vp betimes in the morning and sware one to another.
 and isaac sent them away and they departed from him in peace.
 and it came to passe the same day that isaacs seruants came and tolde him concerning the well which they had digged and said vnto him we haue found water.
 and he called it shebah.
 therefore the name of the citie is beersheba vnto this day.
 and esau was forty yeeres old when he tooke to wife iudith the daughter of beeri the hittite and bashemath the daughter of elon the hittite.
 which were a griefe of minde vnto isaac and to rebekah.
 and it came to passe that when isaac was old and his eyes were dimme so that he could not see hee called esau his eldest son and said vnto him my sonne.
 and hee said vnto him behold here am i.
 and he said behold now i am old i know not the day of my death.
 now therefore take i pray thee thy weapons thy quiuer and thy bow and goe out to the field and take mee some venison.
 and make me sauoury meat such as i loue and bring it to mee that i may eate that my soule may blesse thee before i die.
 and rebekah heard when isaac spake to esau his sonne.
 and esau went to the fielde to hunt for venison and to bring it.
 and rebekah spake vnto iacob her sonne saying behold i heard thy father speake vnto esau thy brother saying bring me venison and make mee sauoury meat that i may eate and blesse thee before the lord before my death.
 now therefore my sonne obey my voyce according to that which i command thee.
 goe now to the flocke and fetch me from thence two good kids of the goates and i will make them sauoury meat for thy father such as he loueth.
 and thou shalt bring it to thy father that he may eate and that he may blesse thee before his death.
 and iacob said to rebekah his mother behold esau my brother is a hairy man and i am a smooth man.
 my father peraduenture will feele me and i shall seeme to him as a deceiuer and i shall bring a curse vpon me and not a blessing.
 and his mother said vnto him upon me be thy curse my sonne.
 onely obey my voice and go fetch me them.
 and hee went and fetched and brought them to his mother and his mother made sauoury meat such as his father loued.
 and rebekah tooke goodly raiment of her eldest sonne esau which were with her in the house and put them vpon iacob her yonger sonne.
 and shee put the skinnes of the kids of the goats vpon his hands and vpon the smooth of his necke.
 and she gaue the sauoury meate and the bread which she had prepared into the hand of her sonne iacob.
 and he came vnto his father and said my father.
 and he said here am i.
 who art thou my sonne.
 and iacob said vnto his father i am esau thy first borne.
 i haue done according as thou badest mee.
 arise i pray thee sit and eate of my venison that thy soule may blesse me.
 and isaac said vnto his sonne how is it that thou hast found it so quickly my sonne.
 and he said because the lord thy god brought it to me.
 and isaac saide vnto iacob come neere i pray thee that i may feele thee my sonne whether thou bee my very sonne esau or not.
 and iacob went neere vnto isaac his father.
 and hee felt him and said the voyce is iacobs voyce but the hands are the hands of esau.
 and he discerned him not because his hands were hairie as his brother esaus hands.
 so he blessed him.
 and he said art thou my very sonne esau.
 and he said i am.
 and he said bring it neere to me and i will eate of my sonnes venison that my soule may blesse thee.
 and hee brought it neere to him and he did eate.
 and he brought him wine he dranke.
 and his father isaac saide vnto him come neere now and kisse me my sonne.
 and hee came neere and kissed him.
 and he smelled the smell of his raiment and blessed him and said see the smell of my sonne is as the smell of a field which the lord hath blessed.
 therefore god giue thee of the dew of heauen and the fatnesse of the earth and plenty of corne and wine.
 let people serue thee and nations bow downe to thee.
 bee lord ouer thy brethren let thy mothers sonnes bow downe to thee.
 cursed bee euery one that curseth thee and blessed be hee that blesseth thee.
 and it came to passe as soone as isaac had made an ende of blessing iacob and iacob was yet scarce gone out from the presence of isaac his father that esau his brother came in from his hunting.
 and hee also had made sauoury meate and brought it vnto his father and said vnto his father let my father arise and eat of his sonnes venison that thy soule may blesse me.
 and isaac his father said vnto him who art thou.
 and he said i am thy sonne thy first borne esau.
 and isaac trembled very exceedingly and said who.
 where is he that hath taken venison and brought it me and i haue eaten of all before thou camest and haue blessed him.
 yea and he shalbe blessed.
 and when esau heard the words of his father he cried with a great and exceeding bitter cry and said vnto his father blesse mee euen me also o my father.
 and hee said thy brother came with subtilty and hath taken away thy blessing.
 and he said is not he rightly naned iacob.
 for he hath supplanted me these two times.
 hee tooke away my birthright and behold now he hath taken away my blessing.
 and hee said hast thou not reserued a blessing for mee.
 and isaac answered and saide vnto esau behold i haue made him thy lord and all his brethren haue i giuen to him for seruants.
 and with corne and wine haue i susteined him.
 and what shall i doe now vnto thee my sonne.
 and esau said vnto his father hast thou but one blessing my father.
 blesse mee euen mee also o my father.
 and esau lift vp his voyce and wept.
 and isaac his father answered and said vnto him behold thy dwelling shall be the fatnesse of the earth and of the dew of heauen from aboue.
 and by thy sword shalt thou liue and shalt serue thy brother.
 and it shall come to passe when thou shalt haue the dominion that thou shalt breake his yoke from off thy necke.
 and esau hated iacob because of the blessing wherewith his father blessed him.
 and esau said in his heart the dayes of mourning for my father are at hand.
 then will i slay my brother iacob.
 and these words of esau her elder sonne were told to rebekah.
 and shee sent and called iacob her yonger sonne and said vnto him behold thy brother esau as touching thee doeth comfort himselfe purposing to kill thee.
 now therefore my sonne obey my voice.
 and arise flee thou to laban my brother to haran.
 and tary with him a few dayes vntill thy brothers furie turne away.
 untill thy brothers anger turne away from thee and hee forget that which thou hast done to him.
 then i will send and fetch thee from thence.
 why should i be depriued also of you both in one day.
 and rebekah said to isaac i am weary of my life because of the daughters of heth.
 if iacob take a wife of the daughters of heth such as these which are of the daughters of the land what good shall my life doe me.
 and isaac called iacob and blessed him and charged him and saide vnto him thou shalt not take a wife of the daughters of canaan.
 arise goe to padan aram to the house of bethuel thy mothers father and take thee a wife from thence of the daughters of laban thy mothers brother.
 and god almighty blesse thee and make thee fruitfull and multiply thee that thou mayest be a multitude of people.
 and giue thee the blessing of abraham to thee and to thy seede with thee that thou mayest inherit the lande wherein thou art a stranger which god gaue vnto abraham.
 and isaac sent away iacob and hee went to padanaram vnto laban sonne of bethuel the syrian the brother of rebekah iacobs and esaus mother.
 when esau sawe that isaac had blessed iacob and sent him away to padanaram to take him a wife from thence.
 and that as he blessed him he gaue him a charge saying thou shalt not take a wife of the daughters of canaan.
 and that iacob obeyed his father and his mother and was gone to padanaram.
 and esau seeing that the daughters of canaan pleased not isaac his father.
 then went esau vnto ishmael and tooke vnto the wiues which hee had mahalath the daughter of ishmael abrahams sonne the sister of nebaioth to be his wife.
 and iacob went out from beersheba and went toward haran.
 and hee lighted vpon a certaine place and taried there all night because the sunne was set.
 and hee tooke of the stones of that place and put them for his pillowes and lay downe in that place to sleepe.
 and he dreamed and beholde a ladder set vp on the earth and the top of it reached to heauen.
 and beholde the angels of god ascending and descending on it.
 and behold the lord stood aboue it and said i am the lord god of abraham thy father and the god of isaac.
 the land whereon thou liest to thee will i giue it and to thy seede.
 and thy seed shall be as the dust of the earth and thou shalt spread abroad to the west and to the east and to the north and to the south.
 and in thee and in thy seed shall all the families of the earth be blessed.
 and behold i am with thee and will keepe thee in all places whither thou goest and will bring thee againe into this land.
 for i will not leaue thee vntill i haue done that which i haue spoken to thee of.
 and iacob awaked out of his sleepe and he said surely the lord is in this place and i knew it not.
 and he was afraid and said how dreadful is this place.
 this is none other but the house of god and this is the gate of heauen.
 and iacob rose vp earely in the morning and tooke the stone that hee had put for his pillowes and set it vp for a pillar and powred oile vpon the top of it.
 and hee called the name of that place bethel.
 but the name of that citie was called luz at the first.
 and iacob vowed a vow saying if god will be with me and will keepe me in this way that i goe and will giue me bread to eate and raiment to put on so that i come againe to my fathers house in peace.
 then shall the lord be my god.
 and this stone which i haue set for a pillar shall be gods house.
 and of all that thou shalt giue me i will surely giue the tenth vnto thee.
 then iacob went on his iourney and came into the land of the people of the east.
 and he looked and behold a well in the field and loe there were three flocks of sheepe lying by it.
 for out of that wel they watered the flocks.
 and a great stone was vpon the welles mouth.
 and thither were all the flockes gathered and they rolled the stone from the wels mouth watered the sheepe and put the stone againe vpon the wels mouth in his place.
 and iacob said vnto them my brethren whence be ye.
 and they saide of haran are we.
 and he said vnto them know ye laban the sonne of nahor.
 and they sayde we knowe him.
 and he said vnto them is hee well.
 and they said he is well.
 and behold rachel his daughter commeth with the sheepe.
 and hee said loe it is yet high day neither is it time that the cattell should be gathered together.
 water yee the sheepe and goe and feed them.
 and they said we cannot vntill all the flockes bee gathered together and till they rolle the stone from the welles mouth.
 then wee water the sheepe.
 and while hee yet spake with them rachel came with her fathers sheepe.
 for she kept them.
 and it came to passe when iacob saw rachel the daughter of laban his mothers brother and the sheepe of laban his mothers brother.
 that iacob went neere and rolled the stone from the wels mouth and watered the flocke of laban his mothers brother.
 and iacob kissed rachel and lifted vp his voyce and wept.
 and iacob told rachel that hee was her fathers brother and that hee was rebekahs sonne.
 and she ranne and told her father.
 and it came to passe when laban heard the tidings of iacob his sisters sonne that he ranne to meete him and imbraced him and kissed him brought him to his house.
 and hee tolde laban all these things.
 and laban said to him surely thou art my bone and my flesh.
 and he abode with him the space of a moneth.
 and laban said vnto iacob because thou art my brother shouldest thou therefore serue me for nought.
 tell me what shall thy wages be.
 and laban had two daughters.
 the name of the elder was leah and the name of the yonger was rachel.
 leah was tender eyed.
 but rachel was beautiful and well fauoured.
 and iacob loued rachel and said i will serue thee seuen yeeres for rachel thy yonger daughter.
 and laban said it is better that i giue her to thee then that i should giue her to another man.
 abide with mee.
 and iacob serued seuen yeeres for rachel.
 and they seemed vnto him but a few dayes for the loue hee had to her.
 and iacob said vnto laban giue me my wife for my dayes are fulfilled that i may goe in vnto her.
 and laban gathered together all the men of the place and made a feast.
 and it came to passe in the euening that he tooke leah his daughter and brought her to him and he went in vnto her.
 and laban gaue vnto his daughter leah zilpah his mayde for a handmayd.
 and it came to passe that in the morning behold it was leah.
 and he said to laban what is this thou hast done vnto mee.
 did not i serue with thee for rachel.
 wherefore then hast thou beguiled me.
 and laban said it must not be so done in our countrey to giue the yonger before the first borne.
 fulfill her weeke and wee will giue thee this also for the seruice which thou shalt serue with mee yet seuen other yeeres.
 and iacob did so and fulfilled her weeke.
 and he gaue him rachel his daughter to wife also.
 and laban gaue to rachel his daughter bilhah his handmayd to be her mayd.
 and hee went in also vnto rachel and he loued also rachel more then leah and serued with him yet seuen other yeeres.
 and when the lord saw that leah was hated hee opened her wombe.
 but rachel was barren.
 and leah conceiued and bare a sonne and shee called his name reuben.
 for she said surely the lord hath looked vpon my affliction.
 now therefore my husband will loue me.
 and shee conceiued againe and bare a sonne and saide because the lord hath heard that i was hated hee hath therefore giuen mee this sonne also and she called his name simeon.
 and shee conceiued againe and bare a sonne and said now this time will my husband be ioyned vnto me because i haue borne him three sonnes.
 therefore was his name called leui.
 and shee conceiued againe and bare a sonne.
 and she said now wil i praise the lord.
 therefore she called his name iudah and left bearing.
 and when rachel saw that shee bare iacob no children rachel enuied her sister and said vnto iacob giue mee children or els i die.
 and iacobs anger was kindled against rachel and he said am i in gods stead who hath withheld from thee the fruit of the wombe.
 and she said behold my mayde bilhah.
 goe in vnto her and she shall beare vpon my knees that i may also have children by her.
 and shee gaue him bilhah her handmayd to wife.
 and iacob went in vnto her.
 and bilhah conceiued and bare iacob a sonne.
 and rachel said god hath iudged me and hath also heard my voyce and hath giuen me a sonne.
 therefore called she his name dan.
 and bilhah rachels mayd conceiued againe and bare iacob a second sonne.
 and rachel saide with great wrastlings haue i wrastled with my sister and i haue preuailed.
 and she called his name naphtali.
 when leah saw that she had left bearing shee tooke zilpah her mayde and gaue her iacob to wife.
 and zilpah leahs mayde bare iacob a sonne.
 and leah said a troupe commeth.
 and she called his name gad.
 and zilpah leahs mayde bare iacob a second sonne.
 and leah said happy am i for the daughters will call me blessed.
 and she called his name asher.
 and reuben went in the dayes of wheat haruest found mandrakes in the field and brought them vnto his mother leah.
 then rachel saide to leah giue me i pray thee of thy sonnes mandrakes.
 and shee said vnto her is it a small matter that thou hast taken my husband.
 and wouldst thou take away my sonnes mandrakes also.
 and rachel said therefore hee shall lye with thee to night for thy sonnes mandrakes.
 and iacob came out of the field in the euening and leah went out to meet him and said thou must come in vnto mee.
 for surely i haue hired thee with my sonnes mandrakes.
 and hee lay with her that night.
 and god hearkened vnto leah and she conceiued and bare iacob the fift sonne.
 and leah said god hath giuen mee my hire because i haue giuen my mayden to my husband.
 and she called his name issachar.
 and leah conceiued againe and bare iacob the sixth sonne.
 and leah said god hath endued me with a good dowry.
 now will my husband dwel with me because i haue borne him sixe sonnes.
 and shee called his name zebulun.
 and afterwardes shee bare a daughter and called her name dinah.
 and god remembred rachel and god hearkened to her and opened her wombe.
 and shee conceiued and bare a sonne and said.
 god hath taken away my reproch.
 and shee called his name ioseph and saide the lord shall adde to me another sonne.
 and it came to passe when rachel had borne ioseph that iacob said vnto laban send me away that i may goe vnto mine owne place and to my countrey.
 giue mee my wiues and my children for whom i haue serued thee and let me goe.
 for thou knowest my seruice which i haue done thee.
 and laban said vnto him i pray thee if i haue found fauour in thine eyes tary.
 for i haue learned by experience that the lord hath blessed me for thy sake.
 and he said appoint me thy wages and i will giue it.
 and hee said vnto him thou knowest how i haue serued thee and how thy cattell was with me.
 for it was little which thou hadst before i came.
 and it is now increased vnto a multitude.
 and the lord hath blessed thee since my comming.
 and now when shall i prouide for mine owne house also.
 and hee said what shall i giue thee.
 and iacob said thou shalt not giue me any thing.
 if thou wilt doe this thing for mee i will againe feed and keepe thy flocke.
 i will passe through all thy flocke to day remoouing from thence all the speckled and spotted cattell.
 and all the browne cattell among the sheepe and the spotted and speckled among the goates and of such shalbe my hire.
 so shall my righteousnesse answere for mee in time to come when it shall come for my hire before thy face.
 euery one that is not speckled and spotted amongst the goates and browne amongst the sheepe that shalbe counted stollen with me.
 and laban saide beholde i would it might bee according to thy word.
 and he remoued that day the hee goates that were ringstraked and spotted and all the shee goats that were speckled and spotted and euery one that had some white in it and all the browne amongst the sheepe and gaue them into the hand of his sonnes.
 and hee set three dayes iourney betwixt himselfe and iacob.
 and iacob fed the rest of labans flocks.
 and iacob tooke him rods of greene poplar and of the hasel and chesnut tree and pilled white strakes in them and made the white appeare which was in the rods.
 and he set the rods which he had pilled before the flockes in the gutters in the watering troughes when the flocks came to drinke that they should conceiue when they came to drinke.
 and the flockes conceiued before the rods and brought forth cattell ringstraked speckled and spotted.
 and iacob did separate the lambes and set the faces of the flockes toward the ringstraked and all the browne in the flocke of laban.
 and he put his owne flocks by themselues and put them not vnto labans cattell.
 and it came to passe whensoeuer the stronger cattell did conceiue that iacob layd the rods before the eyes of the cattell in the gutters that they might conceiue among the rods.
 but when the cattel were feeble hee put them not in.
 so the feebler were labans and the stronger iacobs.
 and the man increased exceedingly and had much cattell and maydseruants and men seruants and camels and asses.
 and he heard the words of labans sonnes saying iacob hath taken away all that was our fathers.
 and of that which was of our fathers hath hee gotten all this glory.
 and iacob behelde the countenance of laban and behold it was not toward him as before.
 and the lord said vnto iacob returne vnto the land of thy fathers and to thy kindred.
 and i wil be with thee.
 and iacob sent and called rachel and leah to the field vnto his flocke and said vnto them i see your fathers countenance that it is not toward mee as before.
 but the god of my father hath bene with me.
 and yee know that with all my power i haue serued your father.
 and your father hath deceiued mee and changed my wages ten times.
 but god suffered him not to hurt me.
 if hee said thus the speckled shall be thy wages then all the cattell bare speckled.
 and if he said thus the ringstraked shalbe thy hire then bare all the cattell ringstraked.
 thus god hath taken away the cattell of your father and giuen them to mee.
 and it came to passe at the time that the cattell conceiued that i lifted vp mine eyes and saw in a dreame and behold the rammes which leaped vpon the cattell were ringstraked speckled and grisled.
 and the angel of god spake vnto me in a dreame saying iacob.
 and i said here am i.
 and hee said lift vp now thine eyes and see all the rammes which leape vpon the cattell are ringstraked speckled and grisled.
 for i haue seene all that laban doeth vnto thee.
 i am the god of bethel where thou annoyntedst the pillar and where thou vowedst a vow vnto mee.
 now arise get thee out from this land and returne vnto the land of thy kindred.
 and rachel and leah answered and said vnto him.
 is there yet any portion or inheritance for vs in our fathers house.
 are we not counted of him strangers.
 for he hath sold vs and hath quite deuoured also our money.
 for all the riches which god hath taken from our father that is ours and our childrens.
 now then whatsoeuer god hath said vnto thee doe.
 then iacob rose vp and set his sonnes and his wiues vpon camels.
 and he caried away all his cattell and all his goods which he had gotten the cattell of his getting which hee had gotten in padan aram for to goe to isaac his father in the land of canaan.
 and laban went to sheare his sheepe.
 and rachel had stollen the images that were her fathers.
 and iacob stale away vnawares to laban the syrian in that he told him not that he fled.
 so hee fled with all that hee had and he rose vp and passed ouer the riuer and set his face toward the mount gilead.
 and it was tolde laban on the third day that iacob was fled.
 and hee tooke his brethren with him and pursued after him seuen dayes iourney and they ouertooke him in the mount gilead.
 and god came to laban the syrian in a dreame by night and saide vnto him take heed that thou speake not to iacob either good or bad.
 then laban ouertooke iacob.
 now iacob had pitched his tent in the mount.
 and laban with his brethren pitched in the mount of gilead.
 and laban said to iacob what hast thou done that thou hast stollen away vnawares to me and caried away my daughters as captiues taken with the sword.
 wherefore didst thou flie away secretly and steale away from me and didst not tell mee.
 that i might haue sent thee away with mirth and with songs with tabret and with harpe and hast not suffered me to kisse my sonnes and my daughters.
 thou hast now done foolishly in so doing.
 it is in the power of my hand to doe you hurt.
 but the god of your father spake vnto mee yesternight saying take thou heed that thou speake not to iacob either good or bad.
 and now though thou wouldest needes bee gone because thou sore longedst after thy fathers house.
 yet wherefore hast thou stollen my gods.
 and iacob answered and said to laban because i was afraid.
 for i said peraduenture thou wouldest take by force thy daughters from me.
 with whomsoeuer thou findest thy gods let him not liue.
 before our brethren discerne thou what is thine with me and take it to thee.
 for iacob knew not that rachel had stollen them.
 and laban went into iacobs tent and into leahs tent and into the two maid seruants tents.
 but he found them not.
 then went he out of leahs tent and entred into rachels tent.
 now rachel had taken the images and put them in the camels furniture and sate vpon them.
 and laban searched all the tent but found them not.
 and shee said to her father let it not displease my lord that i cannot rise vp before thee.
 for the custome of women is vpon mee.
 and he searched but found not the images.
 and iacob was wroth and chode with laban.
 and iacob answered and said to laban what is my trespasse.
 what is my sinne that thou hast so hotly pursued after me.
 whereas thou hast searched all my stuffe what hast thou found of all thy houshold stuffe.
 set it here before my brethren and thy brethren that they may iudge betwixt vs both.
 this twentie yeeres haue i bene with thee.
 thy ewes and thy shee goates haue not cast their yong and the rammes of thy flocke haue i not eaten.
 that which was torne of beasts i brought not vnto thee.
 i bare the losse of it.
 of my hand didst thou require it whether stollen by day or stollen by night.
 thus i was in the day the drought consumed mee and the frost by night aud my sleep departed from mine eyes.
 thus have i bene twentie yeres in thy house.
 i serued thee fourteene yeeres for thy two daughters and sixe yeres for thy cattel.
 and thou hast changed my wages ten times.
 except the god of my father the god of abraham and the feare of isaac had bin with me surely thou hadst sent me away now emptie.
 god hath seene mine affliction and the labour of my hands rebuked thee yesternight.
 and laban answered and said vnto iacob these daughters are my daughters and these children are my children and these cattell are my cattell and all that thou seest is mine.
 and what can i doe this day vnto these my daughters or vnto their children which they haue borne.
 now therefore come thou let vs make a couenant i and thou.
 and let it be for a witnesse betweene me and thee.
 and iacob tooke a stone and set it vp for a pillar.
 and iacob saide vnto his brethren gather stones.
 and they tooke stones and made an heape and they did eate there vpon the heape.
 and laban called it iegarsahadutha.
 but iacob called it galeed.
 and laban said this heape is a witnesse betweene mee and thee this day.
 therefore was the name of it called galeed and mizpah.
 for he said the lord watch betweene me and thee when we are absent one from another.
 if thou shalt afflict my daughters or if thou shalt take other wiues beside my daughters no man is with vs.
 see god is witnesse betwixt mee and thee.
 and laban said to iacob behold this heape and behold this pillar which i haue cast betwixt me and thee.
 this heape be witnesse and this pillar be witnesse that i will not passe ouer this heape to thee and that thou shalt not passe ouer this heape and this pillar vnto me for harme.
 the god of abraham and the god of nahor the god of their father iudge betwixt vs.
 and iacob sware by the feare of his father isaac.
 then iacob offred sacrifice vpon the mount and called his brethren to eate bread and they did eate bread and taried all night in the mount.
 and earely in the morning laban rose vp and kissed his sonnes and his daughters and blessed them.
 and laban departed and returned vnto his place.
 and iacob went on his way and the angels of god met him.
 and when iacob saw them he said this is gods hoste.
 and hee called the name of that place mahanaim.
 and iacob sent messengers before him to esau his brother vnto the land of seir the countrey of edom.
 and he commaunded them saying thus shall ye speake vnto my lord esau thy seruant iacob saith thus i haue soiourned with laban and stayed there vntill now.
 and i haue oxen and asses flockes and men seruants and women seruants.
 and i haue sent to tell my lord that i may find grace in thy sight.
 and the messengers returned to iacob saying wee came to thy brother esau and also he commeth to meet thee and foure hundred men with him.
 then iacob was greatly afraid and distressed and he diuided the people that was with him and the flockes and herdes and the camels into two bands and said if esau come to the one company and smite it then the other company which is left shall escape.
 and iacob said o god of my father abraham and god of my father isaac the lord which saidst vnto me returne vnto thy countrey and to thy kinred and i will deale well with thee.
 i am not worthy of the least of all the mercies and of all the trueth which thou hast shewed vnto thy seruant.
 for with my staffe i passed ouer this iordan and now i am become two bands.
 deliuer me i pray thee from the hand of my brother from the hand of esau.
 for i feare him lest he will come and smite me and the mother with the children.
 and thou saidst i will surely doe thee good and make thy seed as the sand of the sea which cannot be numbred for multitude.
 and he lodged there that same night and tooke of that which came to his hand a present for esau his brother.
 two hundred shee goats and twentie hee goats two hundred ewes and twentie rammes thirtie milch camels with their colts fortie kine and ten bulles twenty shee ashes and ten foales.
 and hee deliuered them into the hand of his seruants euery droue by themselues and said vnto his seruants passe ouer before me and put a space betwixt droue and droue.
 and he commanded the formost saying when esau my brother meeteth thee and asketh thee saying whose art thou.
 and whither goest thou.
 and whose are these before thee.
 then thou shalt say they be thy seruant iacobs.
 it is a present sent vnto my lord esau.
 and behold also he is behind vs.
 and so commanded he the second and the third and all that followed the droues saying on this maner shal you speake vnto esau when you find him.
 and say ye moreouer beholde thy seruant iacob is behind vs.
 for he said i will appease him with the present that goeth before me and afterward i will see his face.
 peraduenture he will accept of me.
 so went the present ouer before him.
 and himselfe lodged that night in the company.
 and hee rose vp that night and tooke his two wiues and his two women seruants and his eleuen sonnes and passed ouer the foord iabbok.
 and he tooke them and sent them ouer the brooke and sent ouer that hee had.
 and iacob was left alone.
 and there wrestled a man with him vntill the breaking of the day.
 and when he saw that he preuailed not against him he touched the hollow of his thigh.
 and the hollow of iacobs thigh was out of ioynt as hee wrestled with him.
 and he said let me goe for the day breaketh.
 and he said i will not let thee goe except thou blesse me.
 and he said vnto him what is thy name.
 and he said iacob.
 and he said thy name shall be called no more iacob but israel.
 for as a prince hast thou power with god and with men and hast preuailed.
 and iacob asked him and saide tell me i pray thee thy name.
 and he said wherefore is it that thou doest aske after my name.
 and he blessed him there.
 and iacob called the name of the place peniel.
 for i haue seene god face to face and my life is preserued.
 and as he passed ouer penuel the sunne rose vpon him and he halted vpon his thigh.
 therefore the children of israel eate not of the sinewe which shranke which is vpon the hollow of the thigh vnto this day.
 because hee touched the hollow of iacobs thigh in the sinewe that shranke.
 and iacob lifted vp his eyes and looked and behold esau came and with him foure hundreth men.
 and hee diuided the children vnto leah and vnto rachel and vnto the two handmaids.
 and he put the handmaides and their chidren foremost and leah and her children after and rachel and ioseph hindermost.
 and hee passed ouer before them and bowed himselfe to the ground seuen times vntill hee came neere to his brother.
 and esau ran to meete him and imbraced him and fell on his necke and kissed him and they wept.
 and he lift vp his eyes and sawe the women and the children and said who are those with thee.
 and he said the children which god hath graciously giuen thy seruant.
 then the handmaidens came neere.
 they and their children and they bowed themselues.
 and leah also with her children came neere and bowed themselues.
 and after came ioseph neere and rachel and they bowed themselues.
 and he said what meanest thou by all this droue which i met.
 and he said these are to find grace in the sight of my lord.
 and esau said i haue enough.
 my brother keepe that thou hast vnto thy selfe.
 and iacob saide nay i pray thee.
 if now i haue found grace in thy sight then receiue my present at my hand.
 for therefore i haue seene thy face as though i had seene the face of god.
 and thou wast pleased with me.
 take i pray thee my blessing that is brought to thee.
 because god hath dealt graciously with mee and because i haue enough.
 and hee vrged him and he tooke it.
 and he said let vs take our iourney and let vs goe and i will goe before thee.
 and hee said vnto him my lord knoweth that the children are tender and the flockes and heards with yong are with mee.
 and if men should ouerdriue them one day all the flocke will die.
 let my lord i pray thee passe ouer before his seruant and i will leade on softly according as the cattell that goeth before me and the children be able to endure vntill i come vnto my lord vnto seir.
 and esau said let me now leaue with thee some of the folke that are with me.
 and hee said what needeth it.
 let me finde grace in the sight of my lord.
 so esau returned that day on his way vnto seir.
 and iacob iourneyed to succoth and built him an house and made boothes for his cattell.
 therefore the name of the place is called succoth.
 and iacob came to shalem a citie of shechem which is the land of canaan when he came from padan aram and pitched his tent before the citie.
 and he bought a parcell of a field where hee had spread his tent at the hand of the children of hamor shechems father for an hundred pieces of money.
 and hee erected there an altar and called it eleloheisrael.
 and dinah the daughter of leah which shee bare vnto iacob went out to see the daughters of the land.
 and when shechem the sonne of hamor the hiuite prince of the countrey saw her he tooke her and lay with her and defiled her.
 and his soule claue vnto dinah the daughter of iacob and hee loued the damsell and spake kindly vnto the damsell.
 and shechem spake vnto his father hamor saying get mee this damsell to wife.
 and iacob heard that he had defiled dinah his daughter now his sonnes were with his cattel in the field and iacob helde his peace vntill they were come.
 and hamor the father of shechem went out vnto iacob to commune with him.
 and the sonnes of iacob came out of the field when they heard it and the men were grieued.
 and they were very wroth because hee had wrought folly in israel in lying with iacobs daughter.
 which thing ought not to be done.
 and hamor communed with them saying the soule of my sonne shechem longeth for your daughter.
 i pray you giue her him to wife.
 and make ye mariages with vs and giue your daughters vnto vs and take our daughters vnto you.
 and ye shall dwell with vs and the land shall be before you.
 dwell and trade you therein and get you possessions therein.
 and shechem said vnto her father and vnto her brethren let mee finde grace in your eyes and what yee shall say vnto me i will giue.
 aske mee neuer so much dowrie and gift and i will giue according as yee shall say vnto mee.
 but giue me the damsell to wife.
 and the sonnes of iacob answered shechem and hamor his father deceitfully and said because he had defiled dinah their sister.
 and they saide vnto them wee cannot doe this thing to giue our sister to one that is vncircumcised.
 for that were a reproch vnto vs.
 but in this will we consent vnto you.
 if ye will be as we be that euery male of you be circumcised.
 then wil we giue our daughters vnto you and we wil take your daughters to vs and we will dwell with you and we will become one people.
 but if ye will not hearken vnto vs to be circumcised then will we take our daughter and we will be gone.
 and their words pleased hamor and shechem hamors sonne.
 and the yong man deferred not to doe the thing because he had delight in iacobs daughter.
 and he was more honourable then all the house of his father.
 and hamor and shechem his sonne came vnto the gate of their citie and communed with the men of their citie saying.
 these men are peaceable with vs therefore let them dwel in the land and trade therein.
 for the land behold it is large enough for them.
 let vs take their daughters to vs for wiues and let vs giue them our daughters.
 onely herein will the men consent vnto vs for to dwell with vs to be one people if euery male among vs bee circumcised as they are circumcised.
 shall not their cattell and their substance and euery beast of theirs bee ours.
 onely let vs consent vnto them and they will dwell with vs.
 and vnto hamor and vnto shechem his sonne hearkened all that went out of the gate of his citie.
 and euery male was circumcised all that went out of the gate of his citie.
 and it came to passe on the thirde day when they were sore that two of the sonnes of iacob simeon and leui dinahs brethren tooke each man his sword and came vpon the citie boldly and slew all the males.
 and they slew hamor and shechem his sonne with the edge of the sword and tooke dinah out of shechems house and went out.
 the sonnes of iacob came vpon the slaine and spoiled the citie because they had defiled their sister.
 they tooke their sheepe and their oxen and their asses and that which was in the citie and that which was in the field.
 and all their wealth and all their little ones and their wiues tooke they captiue and spoiled euen all that was in the house.
 and iacob said to simeon and leui ye haue troubled me to make me to stinke among the inhabitants of the land amongst the canaanites and the perizzites.
 and i being few in number they shall gather themselues together against me and slay me and i shal be destroyed i and my house.
 and they said should hee deale with our sister as with an harlot.
 and god said vnto iacob arise goe vp to bethel and dwel there.
 and make there an altar vnto god that appeared vnto thee when thou fleddest from the face of esau thy brother.
 then iacob said vnto his household and to all that were with him put away the strange gods that are among you and bee cleane and change your garments and let vs arise and goe vp to bethel and i will make there an altar vnto god who answered me in the day of my distresse and was with me in the way which i went.
 and they gaue vnto iacob all the strange gods which were in their hand and all their earerings which were in their eares and iacob hid them vnder the oke which was by shechem.
 and they iourneyed.
 and the terrour of god was vpon the cities that were round about them and they did not pursue after the sonnes of iacob.
 so iacob came to luz which is in the land of canaan that is bethel hee and all the people that were with him.
 and hee built there an altar and called the place elbethel because there god appeared vnto him when he fled from the face of his brother.
 but deborah rebekahs nurse died and she was buried beneath bethel vnder an oke.
 and the name of it was called allon bachuth.
 and god appeared vnto iacob againe when he came out of padan aram and blessed him.
 and god said vnto him thy name is iacob.
 thy name shall not bee called any more iacob but israel shall bee thy name.
 and hee called his name israel.
 and god saide vnto him i am god almightie.
 be fruitfull and multiply.
 a nation and a company of nations shall be of thee and kings shall come out of thy loynes.
 and the land which i gaue abraham and isaac to thee i will giue it and to thy seed after thee will i giue the land.
 and god went vp from him in the place where he talked with him.
 and iacob set vp a pillar in the place where he talked with him euen a pillar of stone.
 and hee powred a drinke offering thereon and he powred oile thereon.
 and iacob called the name of the place where god spake with him bethel.
 and they iourneyed from bethel.
 and there was but a litle way to come to ephrath.
 and rachel traueiled and she had hard labour.
 and it came to passe when shee was in hard labour that the midwife said vnto her feare not.
 thou shalt haue this sonne also.
 and it came to passe as her soule was in departing for she died that she called his name benoni.
 but his father called him beniamin.
 and rachel died and was buried in the way to ephrath which is bethlehem.
 and iacob set a pillar vpon her graue.
 that is the pillar of rachels graue vnto this day.
 and israel iourneyed and spread his tent beyond the towre of edar.
 and it came to passe when israel dwelt in that land that reuben went lay with bilhah his fathers concubine.
 and israel heard it.
 now the sonnes of iacob were twelue.
 the sonnes of leah.
 reuben iacobs first borne and simeon and leui and iudah and issachar and zebulun.
 the sonnes of rachel.
 ioseph and beniamin.
 and the sonnes of bilhah rachels handmaid.
 dan and naphtali.
 and the sonnes of zilpah leahs handmaid.
 gad and asher.
 these are the sonnes of iacob which were borne to him in padan aram.
 and iacob came vnto isaac his father vnto mamre vnto the citie of arbah which is hebron where abraham and isaac soiourned.
 and the dayes of isaac were an hundred and fourescore yeeres.
 and isaac gaue vp the ghost and died and was gathered vnto his people being old and full of dayes.
 and his sonnes esau and iacob buried him.
 now these are the generations of esau who is edom.
 esau tooke his wiues of the daughters of canaan.
 adah the daughter of elon the hittite and aholibamah the daughter of anah the daughter of zibeon the hiuite.
 and bashemath ishmaels daughter sister of nebaioth.
 and adah bare to esau eliphaz.
 and bashemath bare reuel.
 and aholibamah bare ieush and iaalam and korah.
 these are the sonnes of esau which were borne vnto him in the land of canaan.
 and esau tooke his wiues and his sonnes and his daughters and all the persons of his house and his cattell and all his beasts and all his substance which he had got in the lande of canaan.
 and went into the countrey from the face of his brother iacob.
 for their riches were more then that they might dwell together.
 and the land wherein they were strangers could not beare them because of their cattell.
 thus dwelt esau in mount seir.
 esau is edom.
 and these are the generations of esau the father of the edomites in mount seir.
 these are the names of esaus sonnes.
 eliphaz the sonne of adah the wife of esau reuel the sonne of bashemath the wife of esau.
 and the sonnes of eliphaz were teman omar zepho and gatam and kenaz.
 and timna was concubine to eliphaz esaus sonne and shee bare to eliphaz amalek.
 these were the sonnes of adah esaus wife.
 and these are the sonnes of reuel.
 nahath and zerah shammah and mizzah.
 these were the sonnes of bashemath esaus wife.
 and these were the sonnes of aholibamah the daughter of anah daughter of zibeon esaus wife.
 and she bare to esau ieush and iaalam and korah.
 these were dukes of the sonnes of esau.
 the sonnes of eliphaz the first borne sonne of esau duke teman duke omar duke zepho duke kenaz duke korah duke gatam and duke amalek.
 these are the dukes that came of eliphaz in the land of edom.
 these were the sonnes of adah.
 and these are the sonnes of reuel esaus sonne.
 duke nahath duke zerah duke shammah duke mizzah.
 these are the dukes that came of reuel in the land of edom.
 these are the sonnes of bashemath esaus wife.
 and these are the sonnes of aholibamah esaus wife.
 duke ieush duke iaalam duke korah.
 these were the dukes that came of aholibamah the daughter of anah esaus wife.
 these are the sonnes of esau who is edom and these are their dukes.
 these are the sonnes of seir the horite who inhabited the land lotan and shobal and zibeon and anah.
 and dishon and ezer and dishan.
 these are the dukes of the horites the children of seir in the lande of edom.
 and the children of lotan were hori and hemam.
 and lotans sister was timna.
 and the children of shobal were these.
 aluan and manahath and ebal shepho and onam.
 and these are the children of zibeon both aiah and anah.
 this was that anah that found the mules in the wildernesse as he fed the asses of zibeon his father.
 and the children of anah were these.
 dishon and aholibamah the daughter of anah.
 and these are the children of dishon.
 hemdan and eshban ithran and cheran.
 the children of ezer are these.
 bilhan and zaauan and akan.
 the children of dishan are these.
 uz and aran.
 these are the dukes that came of the horites.
 duke lotan duke shobal duke zibeon duke anah duke dishon duke ezer duke dishan.
 these are the dukes that came of hori among their dukes in the land of seir.
 and these are the kings that reigned in the land of edom before there reigned any king ouer the children of israel.
 and bela the sonne of beor reigned in edom.
 and the name of his citie was dinhabah.
 and bela died and iobab the sonne of zerah of bozra reigned in his stead.
 and iobab died and husham of the land of temani reigned in his stead.
 and husham died and hadad the sonne of bedad who smote midian in the field of moab reigned in his stead.
 the name of his citie was auith.
 and hadad died and samlah of masrekah reigned in his stead.
 and samlah died and saul of rehoboth by the riuer reigned in his stead.
 and saul died and baalhanan the sonne of achbor reigned in his stead.
 and baalhanan the sonne of achbor died and hadar reigned in his stead.
 and the name of his citie was pau and his wiues name was mehetabel the daughter of matred the daughter of mezahab.
 and these are the names of the dukes that came of esau according to their families after their places by their names.
 duke timnah duke aluah duke ietheth duke aholibamah duke elah duke pinon duke kenaz duke teman duke mibzar duke magdiel duke iram.
 these be the dukes of edom according to their habitations in the land of their possession.
 he is esau the father of the edomites.
 and iacob dwelt in the land wherein his father was a stranger in the land of canaan.
 these are the generations of iacob.
 ioseph being seuenteene yeeres old was feeding the flocke with his brethren and the lad was with the sonnes of bilhah and with the sonnes of zilpah his fathers wiues.
 and ioseph brought vnto his father their euill report.
 now israel loued ioseph more then all his children because he was the sonne of his old age.
 and he made him a coat of many colours.
 and when his brethren saw that their father loued him more then all his brethren they hated him and could not speake peaceably vnto him.
 and ioseph dreamed a dreame and he told it his brethren and they hated him yet the more.
 and he said vnto them heare i pray you this dreame which i haue dreamed.
 for beholde wee were binding sheaues in the field and loe my sheafe arose and also stood vpright.
 and behold your sheaues stood round about and made obeisance to my sheafe.
 and his brethren saide to him shalt thou indeed reigne ouer vs.
 or shalt thou indeed haue dominion ouer vs.
 and they hated him yet the more for his dreames and for his words.
 and hee dreamed yet another dreame and told it his brethren and said behold i haue dreamed a dreame more.
 and behold the sunne and the moone and the eleuen starres made obeisance to me.
 and he told it to his father and to his brethren.
 and his father rebuked him and said vnto him what is this dreame that thou hast dreamed.
 shal i and thy mother and thy brethren indeed come to bow downe our selues to thee to the earth.
 and his brethren enuied him.
 but his father obserued the saying.
 and his brethren went to feed their fathers flocke in shechem.
 and israel saide vnto ioseph doe not thy brethren feed the flocke in shechem.
 come and i will send thee vnto them.
 he said to him here am i.
 and he said to him goe i pray thee see whether it bee well with thy brethren and well with the flockes and bring me word againe.
 so hee sent him out of the vale of hebron and he came to shechem.
 and a certaine man found him and behold hee was wandring in the field and the man asked him saying what seekest thou.
 and he said i seeke my brethren.
 tell me i pray thee where they feede their flockes.
 and the man said they are departed hence.
 for i heard them say let vs goe to dothan.
 and ioseph went after his brethren and found them in dothan.
 and when they saw him a farre off euen before he came neere vnto them they conspired against him to slay him.
 and they said one to another behold this dreamer commeth.
 come now therefore and let vs slay him and cast him into some pit and we will say some euill beast hath deuoured him.
 and we shall see what will become of his dreames.
 and reuben heard it and he deliuered him out of their hands and said.
 let vs not kill him.
 and reuben saide vnto them shed no blood but cast him into this pit that is in the wildernesse and lay no hand vpon him.
 that he might rid him out of their hands to deliuer him to his father againe.
 and it came to passe when ioseph was come vnto his brethren that they stript ioseph out of his coate his coat of many colours that was on him.
 and they tooke him and cast him into a pit.
 and the pit was emptie there was no water in it.
 and they sate downe to eat bread.
 and they lift vp their eyes and looked and behold a company of ishmeelites came from gilead with their camels bearing spicery baulme and myrrhe going to cary it downe to egypt.
 and iudah saide vnto his brethren what profit is it if we slay our brother and conceale his blood.
 come and let vs sell him to the ishmeelites and let not our hand bee vpon him.
 for he is our brother and our flesh.
 and his brethren were content.
 then there passed by midianites merchant men and they drew and lift vp ioseph out of the pit and sold ioseph to the ishmeelites for twentie pieces of siluer.
 and they brought ioseph into egypt.
 and reuben returned vnto the pit and behold ioseph was not in the pit.
 and he rent his clothes.
 and hee returned vnto his brethren and said the childe is not and i whither shall i goe.
 and they tooke iosephs coat and killed a kid of the goats and dipped the coat in the blood.
 and they sent the coat of many colours and they brought it to their father and said this haue we found.
 know now whether it bee thy sonnes coat or no.
 and he knew it and said it is my sonnes coat.
 an euil beast hath deuoured him.
 ioseph is without doubt rent in pieces.
 and iacob rent his clothes and put sackcloth vpon his loines mourned for his sonne many dayes.
 and all his sonnes and all his daughters rose vp to comfort him.
 but he refused to be comforted.
 and he said for i will goe downe into the graue vnto my sonne mourning.
 thus his father wept for him.
 and the medanites sold him into egypt vnto potiphar an officer of pharaohs and captaine of the guard.
 and it came to passe at that time that iudah went downe from his brethren and turned in to a certaine adullamite whose name was hirah.
 and iudah saw there a daughter of a certaine canaanite whose name was shuah.
 and he tooke her and went in vnto her.
 and she conceiued bare a sonne and he called his name er.
 and shee conceiued againe and bare a sonne and shee called his name onan.
 and she yet againe conceiued and bare a sonne and called his name shelah.
 and hee was at chezib when shee bare him.
 and iudah tooke a wife for er his first borne whose name was tamar.
 and er iudahs first borne was wicked in the sight of the lord and the lord slew him.
 and iudah said vnto onan goe in vnto thy brothers wife and marrie her and raise vp seed to thy brother.
 and onan knew that the seed should not be his.
 and it came to passe when hee went in vnto his brothers wife that hee spilled it on the ground least that hee should giue seed to his brother.
 and the thing which he did displeased the lord.
 wherefore hee slew him also.
 then said iudah to tamar his daughter in law remaine a widow at thy fathers house til shelah my sonne be growen.
 for he said lest peraduenture he die also as his brethren did and tamar went and dwelt in her fathers house.
 and in processe of time the daughter of shuah iudahs wife died.
 and iudah was comforted and went vp vnto his sheepeshearers to timnath he and his friend hirah the adullamite.
 and it was told lamar saying behold thy father in law goeth vp to timnath to sheare his sheepe.
 and shee put her widowes garments off from her and couered her with a vaile and wrapped her selfe and sate in an open place which is by the way to timnath.
 for shee sawe that shelah was growen and she was not giuen vnto him to wife.
 when iudah saw her he thought her to be an harlot.
 because she had couered her face.
 and hee turned vnto her by the way and said goe to i pray thee let me come in vnto thee.
 for he knew not that she was his daughter in law and she said what wilt thou giue mee that thou mayest come in vnto me.
 and hee said i will send thee a kid from the flocke.
 and shee saide wilt thou giue mee a pledge till thou send it.
 and he said what pledge shall i giue thee.
 and she said thy signet and thy bracelets and thy staffe that is in thine hand.
 and he gaue it her came in vnto her and she conceived by him.
 and shee arose and went away and laid by her vaile from her and put on the garments of her widowhood.
 and iudah sent the kidde by the hand of his friend the adullamite to receive his pledge from the womans hand.
 but he found her not.
 then hee asked the men of that place saying where is the harlot that was openly by the way side.
 and they said there was no harlot in this place.
 and he returned to iudah and said i cannot finde her.
 and also the men of the place said that there was no harlot in this place.
 and iudah said let her take it to her lest we bee shamed.
 behold i sent this kidde and thou hast not found her.
 and it came to passe about three moneths after that it was tolde iudah saying tamar thy daughter in law hath played the harlot and also behold she is with child by whoredom.
 and iudah said bring her foorth and let her be burnt.
 when she was brought forth she sent to her father in law saying by the man whose these are am i with child.
 and shee said discerne i pray thee whose are these the signet and bracelets and staffe.
 and iudah acknowledged them and said she hath bin more righteous then i.
 because that i gaue her not to shelah my sonne.
 and he knew her againe no more.
 and it came to passe in the time of her trauaile that beholde twinnes were in her wombe.
 and it came to passe when shee trauailed that the one put out his hand and the midwife tooke and bound vpon his hand a skarlet threed saying this came out first.
 and it came to passe as he drewe backe his hand that behold his brother came out.
 and she said how hast thou broken foorth.
 this breach bee vpon thee.
 therefore his name was called pharez.
 and afterward came out his brother that had the skarlet threed vpon his hand and his name was called zarah.
 and ioseph was brought downe to egypt and potiphar an officer of pharaoh captaine of the guard an egyptian bought him of the hand of the ishmeelites which had brought him downe thither.
 and the lord was with ioseph and hee was a prosperous man and hee was in the house of his master the egyptian.
 and his master sawe that the lord was with him and that the lord made all that he did to prosper in his hand.
 and ioseph found grace in his sight and he serued him.
 and hee made him ouerseer ouer his house and all that he had he put into his hand.
 and it came to passe from the time that hee had made him overseer in his house and ouer all that he had that the lord blessed the egyptians house for iosephs sake.
 and the blessing of the lord was vpon all that he had in the house and in the field.
 and he left all that he had in iosephs hand.
 and he knew not ought he had saue the bread which he did eate.
 and ioseph was a goodly person and well fauoured.
 and it came to passe after these things that his masters wife cast her eyes vpon ioseph and shee said lie with me.
 but he refused and said vnto his masters wife behold my master wotteth not what is with mee in the house and he hath committed all that he hath to my hand.
 there is none greater in this house then i.
 neither hath hee kept backe any thing from me but thee because thou art his wife.
 how then can i doe this great wickednesse and sinne against god.
 and it came to passe as she spake to ioseph day by day that hee hearkened not vnto her to lie by her or to bee with her.
 and it came to passe about this time that ioseph went in to the house to doe his busines and there was none of the men of the house there within.
 and shee caught him by his garment saying lie with me.
 and he left his garment in her hand and fled and got him out.
 and it came to passe when she saw that hee had left his garment in her hand and was fled forth.
 that she called vnto the men of her house and spake vnto them saying see he hath brought in an hebrew vnto vs to mocke vs.
 he came in vnto me to lie with me and i cried with a loud voice.
 and it came to passe when hee heard that i lifted vp my voice and cried that he left his garment with mee and fled and got him out.
 and she laid vp his garment by her vntill her lord came home.
 and she spake vnto him according to these words saying the hebrew seruant which thou hast brought vnto vs came in vnto me to mocke me.
 and it came to passe as i lift vp my voice and cried that he left his garment with me and fled out.
 and it came to passe when his master heard the words of his wife which she spake vnto him saying after this maner did thy seruant to me that his wrath was kindled.
 and iosephs master tooke him and put him into the prison a place where the kings prisoners were bound.
 and he was there in the prison.
 but the lord was with ioseph and shewed him mercie and gaue him fauour in the sight of the keeper of the prison.
 and the keeper of the prison committed to iosephs hand all the prisoners that were in the prison and whatsoeuer they did there he was the doer of it.
 the keeper of the prison looked not to any thing that was vnder his hand because the lord was with him.
 that which he did the lord made it to prosper.
 and it came to passe after these things that the butler of the king of egypt and his baker had offended their lord the king of egypt.
 and pharaoh was wroth against two of his officers against the chiefe of the butlers and against the chiefe of the bakers.
 and he put them in ward in the house of the captaine of the guard into the prison the place where ioseph was bound.
 and the captaine of the guard charged ioseph with them and he serued them and they continued a season in warde.
 and they dreamed a dreame both of them each man his dreame in one night each man according to the interpretation of his dreame the butler and the baker of the king of egypt which were bound in the prison.
 and ioseph came in vnto them in the morning and looked vpon them and behold they were sad.
 and he asked pharaohs officers that were with him in the warde of his lords house saying wherefore looke ye so sadly to day.
 and they said vnto him we haue dreamed a dreame and there is no interpreter of it.
 and ioseph said vnto them doe not interpretations belong to god.
 tell me them i pray you.
 and the chiefe butler tolde his dreame to ioseph and said to him.
 in my dreame beholde a vine was before mee.
 and in the vine were three branches and it was as though it budded and her blossoms shot foorth.
 and the clusters thereof brought forth ripe grapes.
 and pharaohs cup was in my hand and i tooke the grapes and pressed them into pharaohs cup.
 and i gaue the cup into pharaohs hand.
 and ioseph said vnto him this is the interpretation of it.
 the three branches are three dayes yet within three dayes shall pharaoh lift vp thine head and restore thee vnto thy place and thou shalt deliuer pharaohs cup into his hand after the former manner when thou wast his butler.
 but thinke on me when it shall be well with thee and shew kindenesse i pray thee vnto mee and make mention of me vnto pharaoh and bring me out of this house.
 for indeed i was stollen away out of the land of the hebrewes.
 and here also haue i done nothing that they should put me into the dungeon.
 when the chiefe baker saw that the interpretation was good he said vnto ioseph i also was in my dreame and behold i had three white baskets on my head.
 and in the vppermost basket there was of all maner of bakemeats for pharaoh and the birds did eat them out of the basket vpon my head.
 and ioseph answered and said this is the interpretation thereof.
 the three baskets are three dayes.
 yet within three dayes shall pharaoh lift vp thy head from off thee and shall hang thee on a tree and the birds shall eate thy flesh from off thee.
 and it came to passe the third day which was pharaohs birth day that hee made a feast vnto all his seruaunts.
 and he lifted vp by the head of the chiefe butler and of the chiefe baker among his seruants.
 and he restored the chiefe butler vnto his butlership againe and hee gaue the cup into pharaohs hand.
 but he hanged the chiefe baker as ioseph had interpreted to them.
 yet did not the chiefe butler remember ioseph but forgate him.
 and it came to passe at the end of two ful yeeres that pharaoh dreamed.
 and beholde hee stood by the riuer.
 and behold there came vp out of the riuer seuen well fauoured kine and fat fleshed and they fed in a medow.
 and behold seuen other kine came vp after them out of the riuer ill fauoured and leane fleshed and stood by the other kine vpon the brinke of the riuer.
 and the ill fauoured and leane fleshed kine did eate vp the seuen well fauoured and fat kine.
 so pharaoh awoke.
 and hee slept and dreamed the second time.
 and beholde seuen eares of corne came vp vpon one stalke ranke and good.
 and beholde seuen thinne eares and blasted with the eastwind sprang vp after them.
 and the seuen thinne eares deuoured the seuen ranke and full eares.
 and pharaoh awoke and behold it was a dreame.
 and it came to passe in the morning that his spirit was troubled and he sent and called for all the magicians of egypt and all the wise men thereof.
 and pharaoh tolde them his dreame.
 but there was none that could interprete them vnto pharaoh.
 then spake the chiefe butler vnto pharaoh saying i doe remember my faults this day.
 pharaoh was wroth with his seruants and put mee in warde in the captaine of the guards house both mee and the chiefe baker.
 and we dreamed a dreame in one night i and he.
 we dreamed each man according to the interpretation of his dreame.
 and there was there with vs a yong man an hebrew seruant to the captaine of the guard.
 and wee told him and he interpreted to vs our dreames to each man according to his dreame he did interpret.
 and it came to passe as he interpreted to vs so it was.
 mee he restored vnto mine office and him he hanged.
 then pharaoh sent and called ioseph and they brought him hastily out of the dungeon.
 and he shaued himselfe and changed his raiment and came in vnto pharaoh.
 and pharaoh said vnto ioseph i haue dreamed a dreame and there is none that can interpret it.
 and i haue heard say of thee that thou canst vnderstand a dreame to interpret it.
 and ioseph answered pharaoh saying.
 it is not in me.
 god shall giue pharaoh an answere of peace.
 and pharaoh said vnto ioseph.
 in my dreame behold i stood vpon the banke of the riuer.
 and behold there came vp out of the riuer seuen kine fat fleshed and well fauoured and they fed in a medow.
 and behold seuen other kine came vp after them poore and very ill fauoured and leane fleshed such as i neuer saw in all the land of egypt for badnes.
 and the leane the ill fauoured kine did eate vp the first seuen fat kine.
 and when they had eaten them vp it could not bee knowen that they had eaten them but they were still ill fauoured as at the beginning.
 so i awoke.
 and i saw in my dreame and behold seuen eares came vp in one stalke full and good.
 and behold seuen eares withered thin blasted with the east wind sprung vp after them.
 and the thin eares deuoured the seuen good eares.
 and i told this vnto the magicians but there was none that could declare it to me.
 and ioseph said vnto pharaoh the dreame of pharaoh is one.
 god hath shewed pharaoh what he is about to doe.
 the seuen good kine are seuen yeeres.
 and the seuen good eares are seuen yeeres.
 the dreame is one.
 and the seuen thin and ill fauoured kine that came vp after them are seuen yeeres.
 and the seuen emptie eares blasted with the east wind shall bee seuen yeeres of famine.
 this is the thing which i haue spoken vnto pharaoh.
 what god is about to doe he sheweth vnto pharaoh.
 behold there come seuen yeeres of great plentie throughout all the land of egypt.
 and there shall arise after them seuen yeeres of famine and all the plentie shall be forgotten in the land of egypt.
 and the famine shall consume the land.
 and the plentie shal not be knowen in the land by reason of that famine following.
 for it shalbe very grieuous.
 and for that the dreame was doubled vnto pharaoh twice it is because the thing is established by god.
 and god will shortly bring it to passe.
 now therfore let pharaoh looke out a man discreet and wise and set him ouer the land of egypt.
 let pharaoh doe this and let him appoint officers ouer the land take vp the fift part of the land of egypt in the seuen plenteous yeeres.
 and let them gather all the food of those good yeeres that come and lay vp corne vnder the hand of pharaoh and let them keepe food in the cities.
 and that food shall be for store to the land against the seuen yeeres of famine which shall bee in the land of egypt that the land perish not through the famine.
 and the thing was good in the eyes of pharaoh and in the eyes of all his seruants.
 and pharaoh said vnto his seruants can we find such a one as this is a man in whom the spirit of god is.
 and pharaoh said vnto ioseph forasmuch as god hath shewed thee all this there is none so discreete and wise as thou art.
 thou shalt be ouer my house and according vnto thy word shall all my people be ruled.
 only in the throne will i be greater then thou.
 and pharaoh said vnto ioseph see i haue set thee ouer all the land of egypt.
 and pharaoh tooke off his ring from his hand put it vpon iosephs hand and arayed him in vestures of fine linnen and put a gold chaine about his necke.
 and he made him to ride in the second charet which he had.
 and they cried before him bow the knee.
 and he made him ruler ouer all the land of egypt.
 and pharaoh said vnto ioseph i am pharaoh and without thee shall no man lift vp his hand or foote in all the land of egypt.
 and pharaoh called iosephs name zaphnathpaaneah and he gaue him to wife asenath the daughter of potipherah priest of on.
 and ioseph went out ouer all the lande of egypt.
 and ioseph was thirtie yeeres old when he stood before pharaoh king of egypt and ioseph went out from the presence of pharaoh and went thorowout all the land of egypt.
 and in the seuen plenteous yeres the earth brought forth by handfuls.
 and he gathered vp all the foode of the seuen yeeres which were in the land of egypt and laid vp the foode in the cities.
 the foode of the field which was round about euery citie laid he vp in the same.
 and ioseph gathered corne as the sand of the sea very much vntill he left numbring.
 for it was without number.
 and vnto ioseph were borne two sonnes before the yeeres of famine came.
 which asenath the daughter of potipherah priest of on bare vnto him.
 and ioseph called the name of the first borne manasseh.
 for god said hee hath made me forget all my toile and all my fathers house.
 and the name of the second called he ephraim.
 for god hath caused mee to be fruitfull in the land of my affliction.
 and the seuen yeeres of plenteousnesse that was in the land of egypt were ended.
 and the seuen yeeres of dearth beganne to come according as ioseph had saide and the dearth was in all lands.
 but in all the land of egypt there was bread.
 and when all the land of egypt was famished the people cried to pharaoh for bread.
 and pharaoh said vnto all the egyptians goe vnto ioseph.
 what he saith to you doe.
 and the famine was ouer all the face of the earth.
 and ioseph opened all the storehouses and solde vnto the egyptians.
 and the famine waxed sore in the land of egypt.
 and all countreys came into egypt to ioseph for to buy corne because that the famine was so sore in all lands.
 now when iacob saw that there was corne in egypt iacob said vnto his sonnes why doe ye looke one vpon an other.
 and hee said beholde i haue heard that there is corne in egypt.
 get you downe thither and buy for vs from thence that we may liue and not die.
 and iosephs ten brethren went downe to buy corne in egypt.
 but beniamin iosephs brother iacob sent not with his brethren.
 for he said lest peraduenture mischiefe befall him.
 and the sonnes of israel came to buy corne among those that came.
 for the famine was in the land of canaan.
 and ioseph was the gouernour ouer the land and hee it was that sold to all the people of the land.
 and iosephs brethren came bowed downe themselues before him with their faces to the earth.
 and ioseph saw his brethren and he knew them but made himselfe strange vnto them and spake roughly vnto them.
 and hee saide vnto them whence come ye.
 and they said from the land of canaan to buy food.
 and ioseph knew his brethren but they knew not him.
 and ioseph remembred the dreames which hee dreamed of them and said vnto them ye are spies.
 to see the nakednes of the land you are come.
 and they said vnto him nay my lord but to buy food are thy seruants come.
 we are all one mans sonnes we are true men.
 thy seruants are no spies.
 and he said vnto them nay.
 but to see the nakednesse of the land you are come.
 and they said thy seruants are twelue brethren the sonnes of one man in the land of canaan.
 and behold the yongest is this day with our father and one is not.
 and ioseph said vnto them that is it that i spake vnto you saying ye are spies.
 hereby ye shall be proued.
 by the life of pharaoh ye shall not goe foorth hence except your yongest brother come hither.
 send one of you and let him fetch your brother and ye shalbe kept in prison that your wordes may be proued whether there be any trueth in you.
 or els by the life of pharaoh surely ye are spies.
 and he put them all together into warde three dayes.
 and ioseph said vnto them the third day this doe and liue.
 for i feare god.
 if ye be true men let one of your brethren be bound in the house of your prison.
 goe ye carry corne for the famine of your houses.
 but bring your yongest brother vnto mee so shall your wordes be verified and yee shall not die.
 and they did so.
 and they said one to another we are verily guiltie concerning our brother in that we saw the anguish of his soule when he besought vs and we would not heare.
 therefore is this distresse come vpon vs.
 and reuben answered them saying spake i not vnto you saying doe not sinne against the childe and ye would not heare.
 therefore behold also his blood is required.
 and they knew not that ioseph vnderstood them.
 for hee spake vnto them by an interpreter.
 and hee turned himselfe about from them and wept and returned to them againe and communed with them and tooke from them simeon and bound him before their eyes.
 then ioseph commanded to fill their sackes with corne and to restore euery mans money into his sacke and to giue them prouision for the way.
 and thus did he vnto them.
 and they laded their asses with the corne and departed thence.
 and as one of them opened his sacke to giue his asse prouender in the inne he espied his money.
 for behold it was in his sackes mouth.
 and he said vnto his brethren my money is restored and loe it is euen in my sacke.
 and their heart failed them and they were afraid saying one to an other what is this that god hath done vnto vs.
 and they came vnto iacob their father vnto the land of canaan and told him all that befell vnto them saying.
 the man who is the lord of the land spake roughly to vs and tooke vs for spies of the countrey.
 and we said vnto him we are true men.
 we are no spies.
 we be twelue brethren sonnes of our father.
 one is not and the yongest is this day with our father in the land of canaan.
 and the man the lord of the countrey said vnto vs hereby shall i know that ye are true men.
 leaue one of your brethren here with me and take foode for the famine of your housholds and be gone.
 and bring your yongest brother vnto me.
 then shall i know that you are no spies but that you are true men.
 so will i deliuer you your brother and ye shall traffique in the land.
 and it came to passe as they emptied their sacks that behold euery mans bundle of money was in his sacke.
 and when both they and their father saw the bundels of money they were afraid.
 and iacob their father said vnto them we haue ye bereaued of my children.
 ioseph is not and simeon is not and ye wil take beniamin away.
 all these things are against me.
 and reuben spake vnto his father saying.
 slay my two sonnes if i bring him not to thee.
 deliuer him into my hand and i will bring him to thee againe.
 and he said my sonne shall not goe downe with you for his brother is dead and he is left alone.
 if mischiefe befall him by the way in the which yee goe then shall ye bring downe my gray haires with sorrow to the graue.
 and the famine was sore in the land.
 and it came to passe when they had eaten vp the corne which they had brought out of egypt their father said vnto them goe againe buy vs a little foode.
 and iudah spake vnto him saying the man did solemnly protest vnto vs saying ye shall not see my face except your brother be with you.
 if thou wilt send our brother with vs we will goe downe and buy thee food.
 but if thou wilt not send him we will not goe downe.
 for the man saide vnto vs ye shall not see my face except your brother be with you.
 and israel said wherefore dealt ye so ill with me as to tell the man whether ye had yet a brother.
 and they said the man asked vs straitly of our state and of our kindred saying is your father yet aliue.
 haue yee another brother.
 and we tolde him according to the tenour of these words.
 could we certainely knowe that he would say bring your brother downe.
 and iudah said vnto israel his father send the lad with me and wee will arise and go that we may liue and not die both we and thou and also our little ones.
 i will be surety for him.
 of my hand shalt thou require him.
 if i bring him not vnto thee and set him before thee then let me beare the blame for euer.
 for except we had lingred surely now wee had returned this second time.
 and their father israel said vnto them if it must bee so now doe this.
 take of the best fruits in the land in your vessels and carie downe the man a present a litle balme and a litle honie spices and myrrhe nuts and almonds.
 and take double money in your hand and the money that was brought againe in the mouth of your sackes.
 carie it againe in your hand peraduenture it was an ouersight.
 take also your brother and arise goe againe vnto the man.
 and god almightie giue you mercie before the man that he may send away your other brother and beniamin.
 if i be bereaued of my children i am bereaued.
 and the men tooke that present and they tooke double money in their hand and beniamin and rose vp and went downe to egypt and stood before ioseph.
 and when ioseph sawe beniamin with them hee said to the ruler of his house bring these men home and slay and make ready.
 for these men shall dine with me at noone.
 and the man did as ioseph hade.
 and the man brought the men into iosephs house.
 and the men were afraid because they were brought into iosephs house and they said because of the money that was returned in our sackes at the first time are we brought in that hee may seeke occasion against vs and fall vpon vs and take vs for bondmen and our asses.
 and they came neere to the steward of iosephs house and they communed with him at the doore of the house and said o sir we came indeed downe at the first time to buy food.
 and it came to passe when wee came to the inne that wee opened our sackes and behold euery mans money was in the mouth of his sacke our money in ful weight.
 and we haue brought it againe in our hand.
 and other money haue wee brought downe in our handes to buy food.
 we cannot tell who put our money in our sackes.
 and he said peace be to you feare not.
 your god and the god of your father hath giuen you treasure in your sackes.
 i had your money.
 and hee brought simeon out vnto them.
 and the man brought the men into iosephs house and gaue them water and they washed their feete and he gaue their asses prouender.
 and they made ready the present against ioseph came at noone.
 for they heard that they should eate bread there.
 and when ioseph came home they brought him the present which was in their hand into the house and bowed themselues to him to the earth.
 and he asked them of their welfare and said is your father well the old man of whom ye spake.
 is he yet aliue.
 and they answered thy seruant our father is in good health hee is yet aliue.
 they bowed downe their heads and made obeisance.
 and he lift vp his eyes and sawe his brother beniamin his mothers sonne and said is this your yonger brother of whom yee spake vnto mee.
 and he said god be gracious vnto thee my sonne.
 and ioseph made haste.
 for his bowels did yerne vpon his brother.
 and he sought where to weepe and hee entred into his chamber wept there.
 and he washed his face and went out and refrained himselfe and saide set on bread.
 and they set on for him by himselfe and for them by themselues and for the egyptians which did eate with him by themselues.
 because the egyptians might not eate bread with the hebrewes.
 for that is an abomination vnto the egyptians.
 and they sate before him the first borne according to his birthright and the yongest according to his youth.
 and the men marueiled one at another.
 and hee tooke and sent measses vnto them from before him.
 but beniamins measse was fiue times so much as any of theirs.
 and they drunke and were merry with him.
 and hee commaunded the steward of his house saying fill the mens sackes with food as much as they can carie and put euery mans money in his sacks mouth.
 and put my cup the siluer cup in the sackes mouth of the youngest and his corne money.
 and he did according to the word that ioseph had spoken.
 assoone as the morning was light the men were sent away they and their asses.
 and when they were gone out of the citie and not yet farre off ioseph said vnto his steward up follow after the men.
 and when thou doest ouertake them say vnto them wherefore haue ye rewarded euill for good.
 is not this it in which my lord drinketh.
 and whereby indeed he diuineth.
 ye haue done euill in so doing.
 and he ouertooke them and he spake vnto them these same words.
 and they said vnto him wherefore saith my lord these words.
 god forbid that thy seruants should doe according to this thing.
 behold the money which wee found in our sackes mouthes wee brought againe vnto thee out of the land of canaan.
 how then should wee steale out of thy lords house siluer or golde.
 with whom soeuer of thy seruants it be found both let him die and we also will be my lords bondmen.
 and he said now also let it be according vnto your wordes.
 hee with whom it is found shall be my seruant.
 and ye shall be blamelesse.
 then they speedily tooke downe euery man his sacke to the ground and opened euery man his sacke.
 and he searched and began at the eldest and left at the yongest.
 and the cup was found in beniamins sacke.
 then they rent their clothes and laded euery man his asse and returned to the citie.
 and iudah and his brethren came to iosephs house.
 for he was yet there and they fell before him on the ground.
 and ioseph said vnto them what deed is this that ye haue done.
 wote ye not that such a man as i can certainely diuine.
 and iudah said what shall wee say vnto my lord.
 what shal we speake.
 or how shall we cleare our selues.
 god hath found out the iniquitie of thy seruants.
 beholde wee are my lords seruants both we and he also with whom the cup is found.
 and he said god forbid that i should doe so.
 but the man in whose hand the cup is found he shal be my seruant.
 and as for you get you vp in peace vnto your father.
 then iudah came neere vnto him and said oh my lord let thy seruant i pray thee speake a word in my lords eares let not thine anger burne against thy seruant.
 for thou art euen as pharaoh.
 my lord asked his seruants saying.
 haue ye a father or a brother.
 and we said vnto my lord wee haue a father an olde man and a childe of his old age a little one.
 and his brother is dead and he alone is left of his mother and his father loueth him.
 and thou saidst vnto thy seruants bring him downe vnto mee that i may set mine eyes vpon him.
 and we said vnto my lord the lad cannot leaue his father.
 for if hee should leaue his father his father would die.
 and thou saidst vnto thy seruants except your yongest brother come downe with you you shall see my face no more.
 and it came to passe when wee came vp vnto thy seruant my father we told him the words of my lord.
 and our father said goe againe and buy vs a little food.
 and we saide wee cannot goe downe.
 if our yongest brother be with vs then will we goe downe.
 for wee may not see the mans face except our yongest brother be with vs.
 and thy seruant my father said vnto vs ye know that my wife bare me two sonnes.
 and the one went out from me and i said surely he is torne in pieces.
 and i saw him not since.
 and if ye take this also from me and mischiefe befall him ye shall bring downe my gray haires with sorrow to the graue.
 now therefore when i come to thy seruant my father and the lad bee not with vs.
 seeing that his life is bound vp in the lads life.
 it shall come to passe when he seeth that the lad is not with vs that he will die and thy seruants shall bring downe the gray haires of thy seruant our father with sorrow to the graue.
 for thy seruant became surety for the lad vnto my father saying if i bring him not vnto thee then i shall beare the blame to my father for euer.
 now therefore i pray thee let thy seruant abide in stead of the lad a bondman to my lord and let the lad goe vp with his brethren.
 for how shall i goe vp to my father and the lad be not with mee lest peraduenture i see the euill that shall come on my father.
 then ioseph could not refraine himselfe before all them that stood by him.
 and he cried cause euery man to goe out from me.
 and there stood no man with him while ioseph made himselfe knowen vnto his brethren.
 and he wept aloud.
 and the egyptians and the house of pharaoh heard.
 and ioseph said vnto his brethren i am ioseph.
 doeth my father yet liue.
 and his brethren could not answere him.
 for they were troubled at his presence.
 and ioseph said vnto his brethren come neere to me i pray you.
 and they came neere.
 and he said i am ioseph your brother whom ye sold into egypt.
 now therefore bee not grieued nor angry with your selues that yee sold me hither.
 for god did send me before you to preserue life.
 for these two yeeres hath the famine bene in the land.
 and yet there are fiue yeeres in the which there shall neither be earing nor haruest.
 and god sent me before you to preserue you a posteritie in the earth and to saue your liues by a great deliuerance.
 so now it was not you that sent me hither but god.
 and he hath made me a father to pharaoh and lord of all his house and a ruler throughout all the land of egypt.
 haste you and goe vp to my father and say vnto him thus saith thy sonne ioseph.
 god hath made me lord of all egypt.
 come downe vnto me tary not.
 and thou shalt dwell in the land of goshen and thou shalt be neere vnto me thou and thy children and thy childrens children and thy flockes and thy heards and all that thou hast.
 and there wil i nourish thee for yet there are fiue yeeres of famine lest thou and thy houshold and all that thou hast come to pouertie.
 and behold your eyes see and the eyes of my brother beniamin that it is my mouth that speaketh vnto you.
 and you shall tell my father of all my glory in egypt and of all that you haue seene and ye shall haste and bring downe my father hither.
 and he fel vpon his brother beniamins necke and wept.
 and beniamin wept vpon his necke.
 moreouer hee kissed all his brethren and wept vpon them.
 and after that his brethren talked with him.
 and the fame thereof was heard in pharaohs house saying iosephs brethren are come.
 and it pleased pharaoh well and his seruants.
 and pharaoh said vnto ioseph say vnto thy brethren this doe yee lade your beasts and goe get you vnto the land of canaan.
 and take your father and your housholds and come vnto mee.
 and i wil giue you the good of the land of egypt and ye shall eat the fat of the land.
 now thou art commanded this doe yee.
 take you wagons out of the land of egypt for your little ones and for your wiues and bring your father and come.
 also regard not your stuffe.
 for the good of all the land of egypt is yours.
 and the children of israel did so.
 and ioseph gaue them wagons according to the commandement of pharaoh and gaue them prouision for the way.
 to all of them he gaue each man changes of raiment.
 but to beniamin hee gaue three hundred pieces of siluer and fiue changes of raiment.
 and to his father hee sent after this maner.
 ten asses laden with the good things of egypt and ten shee asses laden with corne and bread and meat for his father by the way.
 so he sent his brethren away and they departed.
 and hee said vnto them see that yee fall not out by the way.
 and they went vp out of egypt and came into the land of canaan vnto iacob their father and told him saying ioseph is yet aliue and he is gouernour ouer all the land of egypt.
 and iacobs heart fainted for he beleeued them not.
 and they told him all the words of ioseph which hee had saide vnto them.
 and when hee saw the wagons which ioseph had sent to carie him the spirit of iacob their father reuiued.
 and israel said it is enough.
 ioseph my sonne is yet aliue.
 i will goe and see him before i die.
 and israel tooke his iourney with all that hee had and came to beersheba and offered sacrifices vnto the god of his father isaac.
 and god spake vnto israel in the visions of the night and said iacob iacob.
 and he said here am i.
 and he said i am god the god of thy father feare not to goe downe into egypt.
 for i will there make of thee a great nation.
 i will goe downe with thee into egypt.
 and i will also surely bring thee vp againe.
 and ioseph shall put his hand vpon thine eyes.
 and iacob rose vp from beersheba.
 and the sonnes of israel caried iacob their father and their litle ones and their wiues in the wagons which pharaoh had sent to cary him.
 and they tooke their cattell and their goods which they had gotten in the land of canaan and came into egypt iacob and all his seed with him.
 his sonnes and his sonnes sonnes with him his daughters and his sonnes daughters and all his seed brought he with him into egypt.
 and these are the names of the children of israel which came into egypt iacob and his sonnes.
 reuben iacobs first borne.
 and the sonnes of reuben hanoch and phallu and hezron and carmi.
 and the sonnes of simeon.
 iemuel and iamin and ohad and iachin and zohar and shaul the sonne of a canaanitish woman.
 and the sonnes of leui.
 gershon kohath and merari.
 and the sonnes of iudah.
 er and onan and shelah and pharez and zerah.
 but er onan died in the land of canaan.
 and the sonnes of pharez were hezron and hamul.
 and the sonnes of issachar.
 tola and phuuah and iob and shimron.
 and the sonnes of zebulun.
 sered and elon and iahleel.
 these bee the sonnes of leah which she bare vnto iacob in padanaram with his daughter dinah.
 all the soules of his sonnes and his daughters were thirtie and three.
 and the sonnes of gad.
 ziphion and haggi shuni and ezbon eri and arodi and areli.
 and the sonnes of asher.
 iimnah and ishuah and isui and beriah and serah their sister.
 and the sonnes of beriah.
 heber and malchiel.
 these are the sonnes of zilpah whome laban gaue to leah his daughter.
 and these she bare vnto iacob euen sixteene soules.
 the sonnes of rachel iacobs wife.
 ioseph and beniamin.
 and vnto ioseph in the lande of egypt were borne manasseh and ephraim which asenath the daughter of potipherah priest of on bare vnto him.
 and the sonnes of beniamin were belah and becher and ashbel gera and naaman ehi and rosh muppim and huppim and ard.
 these are the sonnes of rachel which were borne to iacob.
 all the soules were fourteene.
 and the sonnes of dan.
 hushim.
 and the sonnes of naphtali.
 iahzeel and guni and iezer and shillem.
 these are the sonnes of bilhah which laban gaue vnto rachel his daughter and she bare these vnto iacob.
 all the soules were seuen.
 all the soules that came with iacob into egypt which came out of his loines besides iacobs sonnes wiues all the soules were threescore and sixe.
 and the sonnes of ioseph which were borne him in egypt were two soules.
 all the soules of the house of iacob which came into egypt were threescore and ten.
 and he sent iudah before him vnto ioseph to direct his face vnto goshen and they came into the lande of goshen.
 and ioseph made ready his charet and went vp to meet israel his father to goshen and presented himselfe vnto him.
 and he fell on his necke and wept on his necke a good while.
 and israel saide vnto ioseph now let me die since i haue seene thy face because thou art yet aliue.
 and ioseph said vnto his brethren and vnto his fathers house i will goe vp and shew pharaoh and say vnto him my brethren my fathers house which were in the land of canaan are come vnto me.
 and the men are sheapheards for their trade hath bene to feed cattell.
 and they haue brought their flocks and their heards and all that they haue.
 and it shall come to passe when pharaoh shall call you and shall say what is your occupation.
 that ye shall say thy seruants trade hath bene about cattell from our youth euen vntill now both we and also our fathers.
 that ye may dwell in the land of goshen.
 for euery shepheard is an abomination vnto the egyptians.
 then ioseph came and tolde pharaoh and saide my father and my brethren and their flockes and their heards and all that they haue are come out of the land of canaan.
 and behold they are in the land of goshen.
 and hee tooke some of his brethren euen fiue men presented them vnto pharaoh.
 and pharaoh said vnto his brethren what is your occupation.
 and they said vnto pharaoh thy seruants are shepheards both wee and also our fathers.
 they said moreouer vnto pharaoh for to soiourne in the land are we come.
 for thy seruants haue no pasture for their flockes for the famine is sore in the land of canaan.
 now therefore we pray thee let thy seruants dwel in the land of goshen.
 and pharaoh spake vnto ioseph saying thy father and thy brethren are come vnto thee.
 the land of egypt is before thee.
 in the best of the land make thy father and brethren to dwell in the lande of goshen let them dwell.
 and if thou knowest any man of actiuitie amongst them then make them rulers ouer my cattell.
 and ioseph brought in iacob his father and set him before pharaoh.
 and iacob blessed pharaoh.
 and pharaoh said vnto iacob how old art thou.
 and iacob said vnto pharaoh the dayes of the yeeres of my pilgrimage are an hundred thirtie yeres.
 few and euill haue the dayes of the yeeres of my life bene and haue not attained vnto the dayes of the yeeres of the life of my fathers in the dayes of their pilgrimage.
 and iacob blessed pharaoh and went out from before pharaoh.
 and ioseph placed his father and his brethren and gaue them a possession in the land of egypt in the best of the land in the land of rameses as pharaoh had commanded.
 and ioseph nourished his father and his brethren and all his fathers houshold with bread according to their families.
 and there was no bread in all the land.
 for the famine was very sore so that the land of egypt and all the land of canaan fainted by reason of the famine.
 and ioseph gathered vp all the money that was found in the land of egypt and in the land of canaan for the corne which they bought.
 and ioseph brought the money into pharaohs house.
 and when money failed in the land of egypt and in the land of canaan all the egyptians came vnto ioseph and said giue vs bread.
 for why should we die in thy presence.
 for the money faileth.
 and ioseph said giue your cattell.
 and i will giue you for your catell if money faile.
 and they brought their cattel vnto ioseph.
 and ioseph gaue them bread in exchange for horses and for the flockes and for the cattell of the heards and for the asses and he fed them with bread for all their cattel for that yeere.
 when that yeere was ended they came vnto him the second yeere and said vnto him we will not hide it from my lord how that our money is spent my lord also had our heards of cattell.
 there is not ought left in the sight of my lord but our bodies and our lands.
 wherfore shall we die before thine eyes both we and our land.
 buy vs and our land for bread and we and our land will be seruants vnto pharaoh.
 and giue vs seede that we may liue and not die that the land be not desolate.
 and ioseph bought all the land of egypt for pharaoh.
 for the egyptians sold euery man his field because the famine preuailed ouer them.
 so the land became pharaohs.
 and as for the people he remoued them to cities from one end of the borders of egypt euen to the other ende thereof.
 onely the land of the priests bought he not.
 for the priests had a portion assigned them of pharaoh and did eate their portion which pharaoh gaue them.
 wherefore they solde not their lands.
 then ioseph said vnto the people behold i haue bought you this day and your land for pharaoh.
 loe here is seed for you and ye shall sow the land.
 and it shall come to passe in the increase that you shall giue the fift part vnto pharaoh and foure parts shall be your owne for seed of the field and for your food and for them of your households and for food for your litle ones.
 and they said thou hast saued our liues.
 let vs find grace in the sight of my lord and we will be pharaohs seruants.
 and ioseph made it a law ouer the land of egypt vnto this day that pharaoh should haue the fift part.
 except the land of the priests onely which became not pharaohs.
 and israel dwelt in the land of egypt in the countrey of goshen and they had possessions therein and grew and multiplied exceedingly.
 and iacob liued in the land of egypt seuenteene yeres.
 so the whole age of iacob was an hundred fourtie and seuen yeeres.
 and the time drew nigh that israel must die and he called his sonne ioseph and said vnto him if now i haue found grace in thy sight put i pray thee thy hand vnder my thigh and deale kindly and truely with mee bury me not i pray thee in egypt.
 but i will lie with my fathers and thou shalt carie mee out of egypt and bury me in their burying place.
 and he said i will doe as thou hast said.
 and he said sweare vnto mee.
 and he sware vnto him.
 and israel bowed himselfe vpon the beds head.
 and it came to passe after these things that one told ioseph behold thy father is sicke.
 and he tooke with him his two sonnes manasseh and ephraim.
 and one told iacob and said behold thy sonne ioseph commeth vnto thee.
 and israel strengthened himselfe and sate vpon the bed.
 and iacob saide vnto ioseph god almightie appeared vnto mee at luz in the land of canaan and blessed mee and said vnto me behold i wil make thee fruitfull and multiplie thee and i will make of thee a multitude of people and will giue this land to thy seede after thee for an euerlasting possession.
 and now thy two sonnes ephraim and manasseh which were borne vnto thee in the land of egypt before i came vnto thee into egypt are mine.
 as reuben and simeon they shalbe mine.
 and thy issue which thou begettest after them shall be thine and shall be called after the name of their brethren in their inheritance.
 and as for me when i came from padan rachel died by me in the land of canaan in the way when yet there was but a little way to come vnto ephrath.
 and i buried her there in the way of ephrath the same is bethlehem.
 and israel behelde iosephs sonnes and said who are these.
 and ioseph said vnto his father they are my sonnes whom god hath giuen me in this place.
 and he said bring them i pray thee vnto me and i will blesse them.
 now the eyes of israel were dimme for age so that he could not see and hee brought them neere vnto him and he kissed them and imbraced them.
 and israel said vnto ioseph i had not thought to see thy face.
 and loe god hath shewed me also thy seed.
 and ioseph brought them out from betweene his knees and hee bowed himselfe with his face to the earth.
 and ioseph tooke them both ephraim in his right hand toward israels left hand and manasseh in his left hand towards israels right hand and brought them neere vnto him.
 and israel stretched out his right hand and layd it vpon ephraims head who was the yonger.
 and his left hand vpon manassehs head guiding his hands wittingly.
 for manasseh was the first borne.
 and he blessed ioseph and said god before whom my fathers abraham and isaac did walke the god which fedde mee all my life long vnto this day the angel which redeemed mee from all euill blesse the laddes and let my name be named on them and the name of my fathers abraham and isaac and let them grow into a multitude in the midst of the earth.
 and when ioseph saw that his father laide his right hand vpon the head of ephraim it displeased him.
 and he held vp his fathers hand to remoue it from ephraims head vnto manassehs head.
 and ioseph saide vnto his father not so my father.
 for this is the first borne.
 put thy right hand vpon his head.
 and his father refused and said i know it my sonne i know it.
 he also shall become a people and he also shall be great.
 but truely his yonger brother shall be greater then he.
 and his seede shall become a multitude of nations.
 and he blessed them that day saying in thee shall israel blesse saying god make thee as ephraim and as manasseh.
 and he set ephraim before manasseh.
 and israel saide vnto ioseph behold i die.
 but god shall be with you and bring you againe vnto the land of your fathers.
 moreouer i haue giuen to thee one portion aboue thy brethren which i tooke out of the hand of the amorite with my sword and with my bow.
 and iacob called vnto his sonnes and said gather your selues together that i may tell you that which shall befall you in the last dayes.
 gather your selues together and heare ye sonnes of iacob and hearken vnto israel your father.
 reuben thou art my first borne my might and the beginning of my strength the excellencie of dignitie and the excellencie of power.
 unstable as water thou shalt not excell because thou wentest vp to thy fathers bed.
 then defiledst thou it.
 he went vp to my couche.
 simeon and leui are brethren instruments of crueltie are in their habitations.
 o my soule come not thou into their secret.
 vnto their assembly mine honour be not thou vnited.
 for in their anger they slew a man and in their selfe will they digged downe a wall.
 cursed be their anger for it was fierce.
 and their wrath for it was cruell.
 i will diuide them in iacob and scatter them in israel.
 iudah thou art he whom thy brethren shall praise.
 thy hand shall be in the necke of thine enemies thy fathers children shall bow downe before thee.
 iudah is a lyons whelpe.
 from the pray my sonne thou art gone vp.
 he stouped downe hee couched as a lyon and as an old lyon.
 who shall rouse him vp.
 the scepter shall not depart from iudah nor a lawgiuer from betweene his feete vntill shiloh come.
 and vnto him shall the gathering of the people be.
 binding his foale vnto the vine and his asses colt vnto the choice vine.
 he washed his garments in wine and his clothes in the blood of grapes.
 his eyes shall be red with wine and his teeth white with milke.
 zebulun shall dwell at the hauen of the sea and hee shall be for an hauen of ships.
 and his border shall be vnto zidon.
 issachar is a strong asse couching downe betweene two burdens.
 and he saw that rest was good and the land that it was pleasant.
 and bowed his shoulder to beare and became a seruant vnto tribute.
 dan shall iudge his people as one of the tribes of israel.
 dan shalbe a serpent by the way an adder in the path that biteth the horse heeles so that his rider shall fall backward.
 i haue waited for thy saluation o lord.
 gad a troupe shall ouercome him.
 but he shall ouercome at the last.
 out of asher his bread shall be fat and he shall yeeld royall dainties.
 naphtali is a hinde let loose.
 he giueth goodly words.
 ioseph is a fruitfull bough euen a fruitfull bough by a well whose branches runne ouer the wall.
 the archers haue sorely grieued him and shot at him and hated him.
 but his bow abode in strength and the armes of his hands were made strong by the hands of the mighty god of iacob.
 from thence is the sheapheard the stone of israel euen by the god of thy father who shall helpe thee and by the almightie who shall blesse thee with blessings of heauen aboue blessings of the deepe that lyeth vnder blessings of the breasts and of the wombe.
 the blessings of thy father haue preuailed aboue the blessings of my progenitors.
 vnto the vtmost bound of the euerlasting hils they shall bee on the head of ioseph and on the crowne of the head of him that was separate from his brethren.
 beniamin shall rauine as a wolfe.
 in the morning hee shall deuoure the pray and at night he shall diuide the spoile.
 all these are the twelue tribes of israel and this is it that their father spake vnto them and blessed them.
 euery one according to his blessing he blessed them.
 and hee charged them and said vnto them i am to bee gathered vnto my people.
 burie me with my fathers in the caue that is in the field of ephron the hittite in the caue that is in the field of machpelah which is before mamre in the land of canaan which abraham bought with the field of ephron the hittite for a possession of a burying place.
 there they buried abraham and sarah his wife there they buried isaac and rebekah his wife and there i buried leah.
 the purchase of the field and of the caue that is therein was from the children of heth.
 and when iacob had made an end of commanding his sonnes he gathered vp his feete into the bed and yeelded vp the ghost and was gathered vnto his people.
 and ioseph fell vpon his fathers face and wept vpon him and kissed him.
 and ioseph commanded his seruants the physicians to imbalme his father.
 and the physicians imbalmed israel.
 and fortie dayes were fulfilled for him for so are fulfilled the dayes of those which are imbalmed and the egyptians mourned for him threescore and ten dayes.
 and when the dayes of his mourning were past ioseph spake vnto the house of pharaoh saying if now i haue found grace in your eyes speake i pray you in the eares of pharaoh saying my father made me sweare saying loe i die.
 in my graue which i haue digged for me in the land of canaan there shalt thou bury me.
 now therfore let me goe vp i pray thee and bury my father and i will come againe.
 and pharaoh said goe vp and bury thy father according as he made thee sweare.
 and ioseph went vp to bury his father.
 and with him went vp all the seruants of pharaoh the elders of his house and all the elders of the land of egypt and all the house of ioseph and his brethren and his fathers house.
 onely their litle ones and their flockes and their heards they left in the land of goshen.
 and there went vp with him both charets and horsemen.
 and it was a very great company.
 and they came to the threshing floore of atad which is beyond iordan and there they mourned with a great and very sore lamentation.
 and he made a mourning for his father seuen dayes.
 and when the inhabitants of the land the canaanites sawe the mourning in the floore of atad they saide this is a grieuous mourning to the egyptians.
 wherfore the name of it was called abel mizraim which is beyond iordan.
 and his sonnes did vnto him according as he commanded them.
 for his sonnes caried him into the land of canaan and buried him in the caue of the field of machpelah which abraham bought with the field for a possession of a burying place of ephron the hittite before mamre.
 and ioseph returned into egypt he and his brethren and all that went vp with him to bury his father after he had buried his father.
 and when iosephs brethren saw that their father was dead they said ioseph will peraduenture hate vs and will certainely requite vs all the euill which we did vnto him.
 and they sent a messenger vnto ioseph saying thy father did command before he died saying so shall ye say vnto ioseph forgiue i pray thee now the trespasse of thy brethren and their sinne.
 for they did vnto thee euill.
 and now wee pray thee forgiue the trespasse of the seruants of the god of thy father.
 and ioseph wept when they spake vnto him.
 and his brethren also went and fell downe before his face and they said behold we be thy seruants.
 and ioseph saide vnto them feare not.
 for am i in the place of god.
 but as for you yee thought euill against me but god meant it vnto good to bring to passe as it is this day to saue much people aliue.
 now therefore feare yee not.
 i will nourish you and your litle ones.
 and hee comforted them and spake kindly vnto them.
 and ioseph dwelt in egypt he and his fathers house.
 and ioseph liued an hundred and ten yeeres.
 and ioseph sawe ephraims children of the third generation.
 the children also of machir the sonne of manasseh were brought vp vpon iosephs knees.
 and ioseph saide vnto his brethren i die.
 and god will surely visit you and bring you out of this land vnto the land which hee sware to abraham to isaac and to iacob.
 and ioseph tooke an othe of the children of israel saying god will surely visite you and ye shal carie vp my bones from hence.
 so ioseph died being an hundred and ten yeeres old.
 and they imbalmed him and he was put in a coffin in egypt.
 