the book of the generation of jesus christ the son of david the son of abraham.
 abraham begat isaac.
 and isaac begat jacob.
 and jacob begat judah and his brethren.
 and judah begat phares and zara of thamar.
 and phares begat esrom.
 and esrom begat aram.
 and aram begat aminadab.
 and aminadab begat naasson.
 and naasson begat salmon.
 and salmon begat booz of rachab.
 and booz begat obed of ruth.
 and obed begat jesse.
 and jesse begat david the king.
 and david the king begat solomon of her that had been the wife of uriah.
 and solomon begat roboam.
 and roboam begat abia.
 and abia begat asa.
 and asa begat josaphat.
 and josaphat begat joram.
 and joram begat ozias.
 and ozias begat joatham.
 and joatham begat achaz.
 and achaz begat ezekias.
 and ezekias begat manasses.
 and manasses begat amon.
 and amon begat josias.
 and josias begat jechonias and his brethren about the time they were carried away to babylon.
 and after they were brought to babylon jechonias begat salathiel.
 and salathiel begat zorobabel.
 and zorobabel begat abiud.
 and abiud begat eliakim.
 and eliakim begat azor.
 and azor begat sadoc.
 and sadoc begat achim.
 and achim begat eliud.
 and eliud begat eleazar.
 and eleazar begat matthan.
 and matthan begat jacob.
 and jacob begat joseph the husband of mary of whom was born jesus who is called christ.
 so all the generations from abraham to david are fourteen generations.
 and from david until the carrying away into babylon are fourteen generations.
 and from the carrying away into babylon to christ are fourteen generations.
 now the birth of jesus christ was in this manner.
 when his mother mary was espoused to joseph before they came together she was found with child by the holy spirit.
 then joseph her husband being a just man and not willing to make her a public example purposed to put her away privately.
 but while he thought on these things the angel of the lord appeared to him in a dream saying joseph thou son of david fear not to take to thee mary thy wife.
 for that which is conceived in her is by the holy spirit.
 and she shall bring forth a son and thou shalt call his name jesus.
 for he shall save his people from their sins.
 now all this was done that it might be fulfilled which was spoken from the lord by the prophet saying behold a virgin shall be with child and shall bring forth a son and they shall call his name emmanuel which being interpreted is god with us.
 then joseph being raised from sleep did as the angel of the lord had bidden him and took to him his wife.
 and knew her not till she had brought forth her firstborn son.
 and he called his name jesus.
 now after jesus was born in bethlehem of judea in the days of herod the king behold there came wise men from the east to jerusalem saying where is he that is born king of the jews.
 for we have seen his star in the east and have come to worship him.
 when herod the king had heard these things he was troubled and all jerusalem with him.
 and when he had assembled all the chief priests and scribes of the people he inquired of them where christ should be born.
 and they said to him in bethlehem of judea.
 for thus it is written by the prophet and thou bethlehem in the land of judah art not the least among the princes of judah.
 for out of thee shall come a governor that shall rule my people israel.
 then herod when he had privately called the wise men inquired of them diligently what time the star appeared.
 and he sent them to bethlehem and said go and search diligently for the young child.
 and when ye have found him bring me word again that i may come and worship him also.
 when they had heard the king they departed.
 and lo the star which they saw in the east went before them till it came and stood over where the young child was.
 when they saw the star they rejoiced with exceeding great joy.
 and when they had come into the house they saw the young child with mary his mother and fell down and worshiped him.
 and when they had opened their treasures they presented to him gifts.
 gold and frankincense and myrrh.
 and being warned by god in a dream that they should not return to herod they departed into their own country another way.
 and when they had departed behold the angel of the lord appeareth to joseph in a dream saying arise and take the young child and his mother and flee into egypt and be thou there until i bring thee word.
 for herod will seek the young child to destroy him.
 when he arose he took the young child and his mother by night and departed into egypt.
 and was there until the death of herod.
 that it might be fulfilled which was spoken from the lord by the prophet saying out of egypt have i called my son.
 then herod when he saw that he was mocked by the wise men was exceeding wroth and sent forth and slew all the children that were in bethlehem and in all its borders from two years old and under according to the time which he had diligently inquired of the wise men.
 then was fulfilled that which was spoken by jeremiah the prophet saying in rama was there a voice heard lamentation and weeping and great mourning rachel weeping for her children and would not be comforted because they are not.
 but when herod was dead behold an angel of the lord appeareth in a dream to joseph in egypt saying arise and take the young child and his mother and go into the land of israel.
 for they are dead who sought the young childs life.
 and he arose and took the young child and his mother and came into the land of israel.
 but when he heard that archelaus reigned in judea in the room of his father herod he was afraid to go thither.
 notwithstanding being warned by god in a dream he turned aside into the parts of galilee.
 and he came and dwelt in a city called nazareth.
 that it might be fulfilled which was spoken by the prophets he shall be called a nazarene.
 in those days came john the baptist preaching in the wilderness of judea and saying repent ye.
 for the kingdom of heaven is at hand.
 for this is he that was spoken of by the prophet isaiah saying the voice of one crying in the wilderness prepare ye the way of the lord make his paths straight.
 and the same john had his raiment of camels hair and a leathern girdle about his loins.
 and his food was locusts and wild honey.
 then went out to him jerusalem and all judea and all the region about jordan and were baptized by him in jordan confessing their sins.
 but when he saw many of the pharisees and sadducees come to his baptism he said to them o generation of vipers who hath warned you to flee from the wrath to come.
 bring forth therefore fruits meet for repentance.
 and think not to say within yourselves we have abraham for our father.
 for i say to you that god is able of these stones to raise up children to abraham.
 and now also the ax is laid to the root of the trees.
 therefore every tree which bringeth not forth good fruit is hewn down and cast into the fire.
 i indeed baptize you with water to repentance.
 but he that cometh after me is mightier than i whose shoes i am not worthy to bear.
 he shall baptize you with the holy spirit and with fire.
 whose fan is in his hand and he will thoroughly cleanse his floor and gather his wheat into the granary.
 but he will burn the chaff with unquenchable fire.
 then cometh jesus from galilee to jordan to john to be baptized by him.
 but john forbad him saying i have need to be baptized by thee and comest thou to me.
 and jesus answering said to him suffer it to be so now.
 for thus it becometh us to fulfill all righteousness.
 then he suffered him.
 and jesus when he was baptized went up immediately out of the water.
 and lo the heavens were opened to him and he saw the spirit of god descending like a dove and lighting upon him.
 and lo a voice from heaven saying this is my beloved son in whom i am well pleased.
 then was jesus led by the spirit into the wilderness to be tempted by the devil.
 and when he had fasted forty days and forty nights he was afterward hungry.
 and when the tempter came to him he said if thou art the son of god command that these stones be made bread.
 but he answered and said it is written man shall not live by bread alone but by every word that proceedeth out of the mouth of god.
 then the devil taketh him up into the holy city and setteth him on a pinnacle of the temple and saith to him if thou art the son of god cast thyself down for it is written he shall give his angels charge concerning thee.
 and in their hands they shall uphold thee lest at any time thou dash thy foot against a stone.
 jesus said to him it is written again thou shalt not tempt the lord thy god.
 again the devil taketh him up upon an exceeding high mountain and showeth him all the kingdoms of the world and the glory of them and saith to him all these things will i give thee if thou wilt fall down and worship me.
 then saith jesus to him be gone satan.
 for it is written thou shalt worship the lord thy god and him only shalt thou serve.
 then the devil leaveth him and behold angels came and ministered to him.
 now when jesus had heard that john was cast into prison he departed into galilee.
 and leaving nazareth he came and dwelt in capernaum which is upon the sea coast in the borders of zabulon and nephthalim.
 that it might be fulfilled which was spoken by isaiah the prophet saying the land of zabulon and the land of nephthalim by the way of the sea beyond jordan galilee of the gentiles.
 the people who sat in darkness saw great light.
 and to them who sat in the region and shades of death light hath arisen.
 from that time jesus began to preach and to say repent.
 for the kingdom of heaven is at hand.
 and jesus walking by the sea of galilee saw two brethren simon called peter and andrew his brother casting a net into the sea.
 for they were fishers.
 and he saith to them follow me and i will make you fishers of men.
 and they immediately left their nets and followed him.
 and going on from thence he saw other two brethren james the son of zebedee and john his brother in a boat with zebedee their father mending their nets.
 and he called them.
 and they immediately left the boat and their father and followed him.
 and jesus went about all galilee teaching in their synagogues and preaching the gospel of the kingdom and healing all manner of sickness and all manner of disease among the people.
 and his fame spread throughout all syria.
 and they brought to him all sick people that were taken with diverse diseases and torments and those who were possessed with demons and those who were lunatic and those that had the palsy.
 and he healed them.
 and there followed him great multitudes of people from galilee and from decapolis and from jerusalem and from judea and from beyond jordan.
 and seeing the multitudes he ascended a mountain.
 and when he was seated his disciples came to him.
 and he opened his mouth and taught them saying blessed are the poor in spirit.
 for theirs is the kingdom of heaven.
 blessed are they that mourn.
 for they shall be comforted.
 blessed are the meek.
 for they shall inherit the earth.
 blessed are they who hunger and thirst for righteousness.
 for they shall be filled.
 blessed are the merciful.
 for they shall obtain mercy.
 blessed are the pure in heart.
 for they shall see god.
 blessed are the peacemakers.
 for they shall be called children of god.
 blessed are they who are persecuted for righteousness sake.
 for theirs is the kingdom of heaven.
 blessed are ye when men shall revile you and persecute you and shall say all manner of evil against you falsely for my sake.
 rejoice and be exceeding glad.
 for great is your reward in heaven.
 for so they persecuted the prophets who were before you.
 ye are the salt of the earth.
 but if the salt hath lost its savor with what shall it be salted.
 it is thenceforth good for nothing but to be cast out and to be trodden under foot by men.
 ye are the light of the world.
 a city that is set on a hill cannot be hid.
 neither do men light a candle and put it under a close vessel but on a candlestick.
 and it giveth light to all that are in the house.
 let your light so shine before men that they may see your good works and glorify your father who is in heaven.
 think not that i am come to destroy the law or the prophets.
 i am not come to destroy but to fulfill.
 for verily i say to you till heaven and earth shall pass away one jot or one tittle shall in no wise pass from the law till all be fulfilled.
 whoever therefore shall break one of these least commandments and shall teach men so he shall be called the least in the kingdom of heaven.
 but whoever shall do and teach them the same shall be called great in the kingdom of heaven.
 for i say to you that except your righteousness shall exceed the righteousness of the scribes and pharisees ye shall in no case enter into the kingdom of heaven.
 ye have heard that it was said to them of old time thou shalt not kill.
 and whoever shall kill shall be in danger of the judgment.
 but i say to you that whoever is angry with his brother without a cause shall be in danger of the judgment.
 and whoever shall say to his brother raca shall be in danger of the council.
 but whoever shall say thou fool shall be in danger of hellfire.
 therefore if thou shalt bring thy gift to the altar and there remember that thy brother hath aught against thee.
 leave there thy gift before the altar and go thy way.
 first be reconciled to thy brother and then come and offer thy gift.
 agree with thy adversary quickly while thou art in the way with him.
 lest at any time the adversary deliver thee to the judge and the judge deliver thee to the officer and thou be cast into prison.
 verily i say to thee thou shalt by no means come out thence till thou hast paid the uttermost farthing.
 ye have heard that it was said to them of old time thou shalt not commit adultery.
 but i say to you that whoever looketh on a woman to lust after her hath committed adultery with her already in his heart.
 and if thy right eye shall cause thee to sin pluck it out and cast it from thee.
 for it is profitable for thee that one of thy members should perish and not that thy whole body should be cast into hell.
 and if thy right hand shall cause thee to sin cut it off and cast it from thee.
 for it is profitable for thee that one of thy members should perish and not that thy whole body should be cast into hell.
 it hath been said whoever shall put away his wife let him give her a writing of divorcement.
 but i say to you that whoever shall put away his wife saving for the cause of lewdness causeth her to commit adultery.
 and whoever shall marry her that is divorced committeth adultery.
 again ye have heard that it hath been said to them of old time thou shalt not forswear thyself but shalt perform to the lord thy oaths.
 but i say to you swear not at all.
 neither by heaven.
 for it is gods throne.
 nor by the earth.
 for it is his footstool.
 neither by jerusalem.
 for it is the city of the great king neither shalt thou swear by thy head because thou canst not make one hair white or black.
 but let your communication be yea yea nay nay.
 for whatever is more than these cometh of evil.
 ye have heard that it hath been said an eye for an eye and a tooth for a tooth.
 but i say to you that ye resist not evil.
 but whoever shall strike thee on thy right cheek turn to him the other also.
 and if any man will sue thee at the law and take away thy coat let him have thy cloke also.
 and whoever shall constrain thee to go one mile go with him two.
 give to him that asketh thee and from him that would borrow of thee turn not thou away.
 ye have heard that it hath been said thou shalt love thy neighbor and hate thy enemy.
 but i say to you love your enemies bless them that curse you do good to them that hate you and pray for them who despitefully use you and persecute you.
 that ye may be the children of your father who is in heaven.
 for he maketh his sun to rise on the evil and on the good and sendeth rain on the just and on the unjust.
 for if ye love them who love you what reward have ye.
 do not even the publicans the same.
 and if ye salute your brethren only what do ye more than others .
 do not even the publicans so.
 be ye therefore perfect even as your father who is in heaven is perfect.
 take heed that ye do not your alms before men to be seen by them.
 otherwise ye have no reward from your father who is in heaven.
 therefore when thou doest thy alms do not sound a trumpet before thee as the hypocrites do in the synagogues and in the streets that they may have glory from men.
 verily i say to you they have their reward.
 but when thou doest alms let not thy left hand know what thy right hand doeth.
 that thy alms may be in secret.
 and thy father who seeth in secret himself will reward thee openly.
 and when thou prayest thou shalt not be as the hypocrites are .
 for they love to pray standing in the synagogues and in the corners of the streets that they may be seen by men.
 verily i say to you they have their reward.
 but thou when thou prayest enter into thy closet and when thou hast shut thy door pray to thy father who is in secret and thy father who seeth in secret will reward thee openly.
 but when ye pray use not vain repetitions as the heathen do.
 for they think that they shall be heard for their much speaking.
 therefore be ye not like them.
 for your father knoweth what things ye need before ye ask him.
 after this manner therefore pray ye.
 our father who art in heaven hallowed be thy name.
 thy kingdom come.
 thy will be done on earth as it is in heaven.
 give us this day our daily bread.
 and forgive us our debts as we forgive our debtors.
 and lead us not into temptation but deliver us from evil.
 for thine is the kingdom and the power and the glory for ever.
 amen.
 for if ye forgive men their trespasses your heavenly father will also forgive you.
 but if ye forgive not men their trespasses neither will your father forgive your trespasses.
 moreover when ye fast be not as the hypocrites of a sad countenance.
 for they disfigure their faces that they may appear to men to fast.
 verily i say to you they have their reward.
 but thou when thou fastest anoint thy head and wash thy face.
 that thou mayest not appear to men to fast but to thy father who is in secret.
 and thy father who seeth in secret shall reward thee openly.
 lay not up for yourselves treasures upon earth where moth and rust doth corrupt and where thieves break through and steal.
 but lay up for yourselves treasures in heaven where neither moth nor rust doth corrupt and where thieves do not break through nor steal.
 for where your treasure is there will your heart be also.
 the light of the body is the eye.
 if therefore thy eye be single thy whole body will be full of light.
 but if thy eye be evil thy whole body will be full of darkness.
 if therefore the light that is in thee is darkness how great is that darkness.
 no man can serve two masters.
 for either he will hate the one and love the other.
 or else he will hold to the one and despise the other.
 ye cannot serve god and mammon.
 therefore i say to you be not anxious for your life what ye shall eat or what ye shall drink.
 nor yet for your body what ye shall put on.
 is not the life more than food and the body than raiment.
 behold the fowls of the air.
 for they sow not neither do they reap nor gather into barns.
 yet your heavenly father feedeth them.
 are ye not much better than they.
 which of you by anxious care can add one cubit to his stature.
 and why are ye anxious for raiment.
 consider the lilies of the field how they grow.
 they toil not neither do they spin.
 and yet i say to you that even solomon in all his glory was not arrayed like one of these.
 wherefore if god so clotheth the grass of the field which today is and tomorrow is cast into the oven will he not much more clothe you o ye of little faith.
 therefore be not anxious saying what shall we eat.
 or what shall we drink.
 or with what shall we be clothed.
 for after all these things do the gentiles seek for your heavenly father knoweth that ye have need of all these things.
 but seek ye first the kingdom of god and his righteousness and all these things shall be added to you.
 therefore be not anxious for the morrow.
 for the morrow will be solicitous for the things of itself.
 sufficient to the day is its own evil.
 judge not that ye be not judged.
 for with what judgment ye judge ye shall be judged.
 and the measure which ye give shall be measured to you again.
 and why beholdest thou the mote that is in thy brothers eye but considerest not the beam that is in thy own eye.
 or how wilt thou say to thy brother let me pull out the mote out of thy eye.
 and behold a beam is in thy own eye.
 thou hypocrite first cast out the beam out of thy own eye.
 and then shalt thou see clearly to cast out the mote out of thy brothers eye.
 give not that which is holy to dogs neither cast ye your pearls before swine lest they trample them under their feet and turn again and rend you.
 ask and it shall be given you.
 seek and ye shall find.
 knock and the door shall be opened to you.
 for every one that asketh receiveth.
 and he that seeketh findeth.
 and to him that knocketh the door shall be opened.
 or what man is there of you who if his son shall ask bread will give him a stone.
 or if he shall ask a fish will he give him a serpent.
 if ye then being evil know how to give good gifts to your children how much more shall your father who is in heaven give good things to them that ask him.
 therefore all things whatever ye would that men should do to you do ye even so to them.
 for this is the law and the prophets.
 enter ye in at the strait gate.
 for wide is the gate and broad is the way that leadeth to destruction and many there are who go in by it.
 because strait is the gate and narrow is the way which leadeth to life and few there are that find it.
 beware of false prophets who come to you in sheeps clothing but inwardly they are ravening wolves.
 ye shall know them by their fruits.
 do men gather grapes from thorns or figs from thistles.
 even so every good tree bringeth forth good fruit.
 but a corrupt tree bringeth forth evil fruit.
 a good tree cannot bring forth evil fruit neither can a corrupt tree bring forth good fruit.
 every tree that bringeth not forth good fruit is hewn down and cast into the fire.
 wherefore by their fruits ye shall know them not every one that saith to me lord lord shall enter into the kingdom of heaven.
 but he that doeth the will of my father who is in heaven.
 many will say to me in that day lord lord have we not prophesied in thy name.
 and in thy name have cast out demons.
 and in thy name done many wonderful works.
 and then will i profess to them i never knew you.
 depart from me ye that work iniquity.
 therefore whoever heareth these sayings of mine and doeth them i will liken him to a wise man who built his house upon a rock.
 and the rain descended and the floods came and the winds blew and beat upon that house.
 and it fell not.
 for it was founded upon a rock.
 and every one that heareth these sayings of mine and doeth them not shall be likened to a foolish man who built his house upon the sand.
 and the rain descended and the floods came and the winds blew and beat upon that house.
 and it fell and great was the fall of it.
 and it came to pass when jesus had ended these sayings the people were astonished at his doctrine.
 for he taught them as one having authority and not as the scribes.
 when he had come down from the mountain great multitudes followed him.
 and behold there came a leper and worshiped him saying lord if thou wilt thou canst make me clean.
 and jesus put forth his hand and touched him saying i will.
 be thou clean.
 and immediately his leprosy was cleansed.
 and jesus saith to him see thou tell no man.
 but go show thyself to the priest and offer the gift that moses commanded for a testimony to them.
 and when jesus had entered into capernaum there came to him a centurion beseeching him and saying lord my servant lieth at home sick with the palsy grievously tormented.
 and jesus saith to him i will come and heal him.
 the centurion answered and said lord i am not worthy that thou shouldst come under my roof.
 but speak the word only and my servant will be healed.
 for i am a man under authority having soldiers under me.
 and i say to this man go and he goeth.
 and to another come and he cometh.
 and to my servant do this and he doeth it .
 when jesus heard it he marveled and said to them that followed verily i say to you i have not found so great faith no not in israel.
 and i say to you that many shall come from the east and the west and shall sit down with abraham and isaac and jacob in the kingdom of heaven.
 but the children of the kingdom shall be cast out into utter darkness.
 there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth.
 and jesus said to the centurion depart.
 and as thou hast believed so be it done to thee.
 and his servant was healed in the same hour.
 and when jesus had come into peters house he saw his wifes mother laid and sick with a fever.
 and he touched her hand and the fever left her.
 and she arose and ministered to them.
 when the evening was come they brought to him many that were possessed with demons.
 and he cast out the spirits with his word and healed all that were sick.
 that it might be fulfilled which was spoken by isaiah the prophet saying he himself took our infirmities and bore our sicknesses.
 now when jesus saw great multitudes about him he gave commandment to depart to the other side.
 and a certain scribe came and said to him master i will follow thee whithersoever thou goest.
 and jesus saith to him the foxes have holes and the birds of the air have nests.
 but the son of man hath not where to lay his head.
 and another of his disciples said to him lord suffer me first to go and bury my father.
 but jesus said to him follow me.
 and let the dead bury their dead.
 and when he had entered into a boat his disciples followed him.
 and behold there arose a great tempest in the sea insomuch that the boat was covered with the waves.
 but he was asleep.
 and his disciples came to him and awoke him saying lord save us.
 we perish.
 and he saith to them why are ye fearful o ye of little faith.
 then he arose and rebuked the winds and the sea.
 and there was a great calm.
 but the men marveled saying what manner of man is this that even the winds and the sea obey him.
 and when he had come to the other side into the country of the gergesenes there met him two possessed with demons coming out of the tombs exceeding fierce so that no man might pass by that way.
 and behold they cried out saying what have we to do with thee jesus thou son of god.
 art thou come hither to torment us before the time.
 and there was a good way off from them a herd of many swine feeding.
 so the demons besought him saying if thou expellest us suffer us to go away into the herd of swine.
 and he said to them go.
 and when they had come out they went into the herd of swine.
 and behold the whole herd of swine ran violently down a steep place into the sea and perished in the waters.
 and they that kept them fled and went into the city and told every thing.
 and what had befallen to the possessed with demons.
 and behold the whole city came out to meet jesus.
 and when they saw him they besought him that he would depart out of their borders.
 and he entered into a boat and passed over and came into his own city.
 and behold they brought to him a man sick with the palsy lying on a bed.
 and jesus seeing their faith said to the sick of the palsy son be of good cheer.
 thy sins are forgiven thee.
 and behold certain of the scribes said within themselves this man blasphemeth.
 and jesus knowing their thoughts said why think ye evil in your hearts.
 for which is easier to say thy sins are forgiven thee.
 or to say arise and walk.
 but that ye may know that the son of man hath power on earth to forgive sins then saith he to the sick with the palsy arise take up thy bed and go to thy house.
 and he arose and departed to his house.
 but when the multitude saw it they marveled and glorified god who had given such power to men.
 and as jesus was passing from thence he saw a man named matthew sitting at the receipt of custom.
 and he saith to him follow me.
 and he arose and followed him.
 and it came to pass as jesus sat at table in the house behold many publicans and sinners came and sat down with him and his disciples.
 and when the pharisees saw it they said to his disciples why eateth your master with publicans and sinners.
 but when jesus heard that he said to them they that are in health need not a physician but they that are sick.
 but go ye and learn what that meaneth i will have mercy and not sacrifice.
 for i am not come to call the righteous but sinners to repentance.
 then came to him the disciples of john saying why do we and the pharisees fast often but thy disciples fast not.
 and jesus said to them can the children of the bridechamber mourn as long as the bridegroom is with them.
 but the days will come when the bridegroom shall be taken from them and then they will fast.
 no man putteth a piece of new cloth to an old garment.
 for that which is put in to fill it up taketh from the garment and the rent is made worse.
 neither do men put new wine into old bottles.
 else the bottles break and the wine runneth out and the bottles perish.
 but they put new wine into new bottles and both are preserved.
 while he was speaking these things to them behold there came a certain ruler and worshiped him saying my daughter is even now dead.
 but come and lay thy hand upon her and she will live.
 and jesus arose and followed him and so did his disciples.
 and behold a woman who was diseased with an issue of blood twelve years came behind him and touched the hem of his garment.
 for she said within herself if i may but touch his garment i shall be whole.
 but jesus turned himself about and when he saw her he said daughter be of good comfort.
 thy faith hath made thee whole.
 and the woman was made whole from that hour.
 and when jesus came into the rulers house and saw the minstrels and the people making a noise he said to them give place.
 for the maid is not dead but sleepeth.
 and they derided him.
 but when the people were put forth he went in and took her by the hand and the maid arose.
 and the fame of this went abroad into all that land.
 and when jesus departed thence two blind men followed him crying and saying thou son of david have mercy on us.
 and when he had come into the house the blind men came to him.
 and jesus saith to them believe ye that i am able to do this.
 they said to him yes lord.
 then he touched their eyes saying according to your faith be it to you.
 and their eyes were opened.
 and jesus strictly charged them saying see that no man know it .
 but they when they had departed spread abroad his fame in all that country.
 as thy went out behold they brought to him a dumb man possessed with a demon.
 and when the demon was cast out the dumb spoke.
 and the multitudes marveled saying it was never so seen in israel.
 but the pharisees said he casteth out demons through the prince of the demons.
 and jesus went about all the cities and villages teaching in their synagogues and preaching the gospel of the kingdom and healing every sickness and every disease among the people.
 but when he saw the multitudes he was moved with compassion on them because they fainted and were scattered abroad as sheep having no shepherd.
 then saith he to his disciples the harvest truly is plentiful but the laborers are few.
 pray ye therefore the lord of the harvest that he will send forth laborers into his harvest.
 and when he had called to him his twelve disciples he gave them power against unclean spirits to cast them out and to heal all manner of sickness and all manner of disease.
 now the names of the twelve apostles are these.
 the first simon who is called peter and andrew his brother.
 james the son of zebedee and john his brother.
 philip and bartholomew.
 thomas and matthew the publican.
 james the son of alpheus and lebbeus whose surname was thaddeus.
 simon the canaanite and judas iscariot who also betrayed him.
 these twelve jesus sent forth and commanded them saying go not into the way of the gentiles and enter ye not into any city of the samaritans.
 but go rather to the lost sheep of the house of israel.
 and as ye go proclaim saying the kingdom of heaven is at hand.
 heal the sick cleanse the lepers raise the dead cast out demons.
 freely ye have received freely give.
 provide neither gold nor silver nor brass in your purses.
 nor bag for your journey neither two coats neither shoes nor a staff.
 for the workman is worthy of his food.
 and into whatever city or town ye shall enter inquire who in it is worthy and there abide till ye go thence.
 and when ye come into a house salute it.
 and if the house be worthy let your peace come upon it.
 but if it be not worthy let your peace return to you.
 and whoever shall not receive you nor hear your words when ye depart from that house or city shake off the dust of your feet.
 verily i say to you it shall be more tolerable for the land of sodom and gomorrah in the day of judgment than for that city.
 behold i send you forth as sheep in the midst of wolves.
 be ye therefore wise as serpents and harmless as doves.
 but beware of men.
 for they will deliver you to the councils and they will scourge you in their synagogues.
 and ye will be brought before governors and kings for my sake for a testimony against them and the gentiles.
 but when they deliver you up be not anxious how or what ye shall speak for it shall be given to you in that same hour what ye shall speak.
 for it is not ye that speak but the spirit of your father which speaketh in you.
 and the brother will deliver up the brother to death and the father the child.
 and the children will rise up against their parents and cause them to be put to death.
 and ye will be hated by all men for my names sake.
 but he that endureth to the end shall be saved.
 but when they persecute you in this city flee ye into another.
 for verily i say to you ye shall not have gone over the cities of israel till the son of man shall have come.
 the disciple is not above his teacher nor the servant above his lord.
 it is enough for the disciple that he should be as his teacher and the servant as his lord.
 if they have called the master of the house beelzebub how much more will they call them of his household.
 fear them not therefore.
 for there is nothing covered that shall not be revealed.
 and hid that shall not be known.
 what i tell you in darkness that speak ye in light.
 and what ye hear in the ear that publish ye upon the housetops.
 and fear not them who kill the body but are not able to kill the soul.
 but rather fear him who is able to destroy both soul and body in hell.
 are not two sparrows sold for a farthing.
 and not one of them shall fall on the ground without your father.
 but the very hairs of your head are all numbered.
 fear ye not therefore ye are of more value than many sparrows.
 whoever therefore shall confess me before men him will i also confess before my father who is in heaven.
 but whoever shall deny me before men him will i also deny before my father who is in heaven.
 think not that i am come to send peace on earth.
 i came not to send peace but a sword.
 for i am come to set a man at variance against his father and the daughter against her mother and the daughterinlaw against her motherinlaw.
 and a mans foes will be they of his own household.
 he that loveth father or mother more than me is not worthy of me.
 and he that loveth son or daughter more than me is not worthy of me.
 and he that taketh not his cross and followeth me is not worthy of me.
 he that findeth his life shall lose it.
 and he that loseth his life for my sake shall find it.
 he that receiveth you receiveth me and he that receiveth me receiveth him that sent me.
 he that receiveth a prophet in the name of a prophet shall receive a prophets reward.
 and he that receiveth a righteous man in the name of a righteous man shall receive a righteous mans reward.
 and whoever shall give to drink to one of these little ones a cup of cold water only in the name of a disciple verily i say to you he shall in no wise lose his reward.
 and it came to pass when jesus had made an end of commanding his twelve disciples he departed thence to teach and to preach in their cities.
 now when john had heard in the prison the works of christ he sent two of his disciples and said to him art thou he that should come or do we look for another.
 jesus answered and said to them go and show john again those things which ye hear and see.
 the blind receive their sight and the lame walk the lepers are cleansed and the deaf hear the dead are raised and the poor have the gospel preached to them.
 and blessed is he to whom i shall not be the cause of his falling into sin.
 and as they departed jesus began to say to the multitudes concerning john what went ye out into the wilderness to see.
 a reed shaken with the wind.
 but what went ye out to see.
 a man clothed in soft raiment.
 behold they that wear soft clothing are in kings houses.
 but what went ye out to see.
 a prophet.
 yes i say to you and more than a prophet.
 for this is he concerning whom it is written behold i send my messenger before thy face who shall prepare thy way before thee.
 verily i say to you among them that are born of women there hath not risen a greater than john the baptist.
 notwithstanding he that is least in the kingdom of heaven is greater than he.
 and from the days of john the baptist until now the kingdom of heaven suffereth violence and the violent take it by force.
 for all the prophets and the law prophesied until john.
 and if ye will receive it this is elijah who was to come.
 he that hath ears to hear let him hear.
 but to what shall i liken this generation.
 it is like to children sitting in the markets and calling to their fellows and saying we have piped to you and ye have not danced.
 we have mourned to you and ye have not lamented.
 for john came neither eating nor drinking and they say he hath a demon.
 the son of man came eating and drinking and they say behold a man gluttonous and a winebibber a friend of publicans and sinners.
 but wisdom is justified by her children.
 then he began to upbraid the cities in which most of his mighty works had been done because they repented not.
 woe to thee chorazin.
 woe to thee bethsaida.
 for if the mighty works which have been done in you had been done in tyre and sidon they would have repented long ago in sackcloth and ashes.
 but i say to you it shall be more tolerable for tyre and sidon at the day of judgment than for you.
 and thou capernaum which art exalted to heaven shalt be brought down to hell.
 for if the mighty works which have been done in thee had been done in sodom it would have remained until this day.
 but i say to you that it shall be more tolerable for the land of sodom in the day of judgment than for thee.
 at that time jesus answered and said i thank thee o father lord of heaven and earth because thou hast hid these things from the wise and prudent and hast revealed them to babes.
 even so father for so it seemed good in thy sight.
 all things are delivered to me by my father.
 and no man knoweth the son but the father.
 neither knoweth any man the father save the son and he to whomsoever the son will reveal him .
 come to me all ye that labor and are heavy laden and i will give you rest.
 take my yoke upon you and learn from me.
 for i am meek and lowly in heart.
 and ye shall find rest to your souls.
 for my yoke is easy and my burden is light.
 at that time jesus went on the sabbath through the corn and his disciples were hungry and began to pluck the ears of corn and to eat.
 but when the pharisees saw it they said to him behold thy disciples do that which it is not lawful to do on the sabbath.
 but he said to them have ye not read what david did when he was hungry and they that were with him.
 how he entered into the house of god and ate the showbread which it was not lawful for him to eat neither for them who were with him but only for the priests.
 or have ye not read in the law that on the sabbath the priests in the temple profane the sabbath and are blameless.
 but i say to you that in this place is one greater than the temple.
 but if ye had known what this meaneth i will have mercy and not sacrifice ye would not have condemned the guiltless.
 for the son of man is lord even of the sabbath.
 and when he had departed thence he went into their synagogue.
 and behold there was a man who had his hand withered.
 and they asked him saying is it lawful to heal on the sabbath.
 that they might accuse him.
 and he said to them what man shall there be among you that shall have one sheep and if it shall fall into a pit on the sabbath will he not lay hold on it and lift it out.
 how much then is a man better than a sheep.
 wherefore it is lawful to do well on the sabbath days.
 then saith he to the man stretch out thy hand.
 and he stretched it out.
 and it was restored to a sound state like the other.
 then the pharisees went out and held a council against him how they might destroy him.
 but when jesus knew it he withdrew himself from thence.
 and great multitudes followed him and he healed them all.
 and charged them that they should not make him known.
 that it might be fulfilled which was spoken by isaiah the prophet saying behold my servant whom i have chosen.
 my beloved in whom my soul is well pleased.
 i will put my spirit upon him and he shall show judgment to the gentiles.
 he shall not contend nor cry.
 neither shall any man hear his voice in the streets.
 a bruised reed shall he not break and smoking flax shall he not quench till he shall send forth judgment to victory.
 and in his name shall the gentiles trust.
 then was brought to him one possessed with a demon blind and dumb.
 and he healed him so that the blind and dumb both spoke and saw.
 and all the people were amazed and said is not this the son of david.
 but when the pharisees heard it they said this man doth not cast out demons but by beelzebub the prince of the demons.
 and jesus knew their thoughts and said to them every kingdom divided against itself is brought to desolation.
 and every city or house divided against itself shall not stand.
 and if satan casteth out satan he is divided against himself.
 how then shall his kingdom stand.
 and if i by beelzebub cast out demons by whom do your children expel them .
 therefore they shall be your judges.
 but if i cast out demons by the spirit of god then the kingdom of god is come to you.
 or else how can one enter into a strong mans house and seize his goods except he shall first bind the strong man.
 and then he will plunder his house.
 he that is not with me is against me.
 and he that gathereth not with me scattereth abroad.
 wherefore i say to you all manner of sin and blasphemy shall be forgiven to men.
 but the blasphemy against the holy spirit shall not be forgiven to men.
 and whoever speaketh a word against the son of man it shall be forgiven him.
 but whoever speaketh against the holy spirit it shall not be forgiven him neither in this world neither in the world to come.
 either make the tree good and its fruit good.
 or else make the tree corrupt and its fruit corrupt.
 for the tree is known by its fruit.
 o generation of vipers how can ye being evil speak good things.
 for out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaketh.
 a good man out of the good treasure of the heart bringeth forth good things.
 and an evil man out of the evil treasure bringeth forth evil things.
 but i say to you that for every idle word that men shall speak they shall give account in the day of judgment.
 for by thy words thou shalt be justified and by thy words thou shalt be condemned.
 then certain of the scribes and of the pharisees answered saying master we would see a sign from thee.
 but he answered and said to them an evil and adulterous generation seeketh for a sign and there shall no sign be given to it but the sign of the prophet jonah.
 for as jonah was three days and three nights in the whales belly.
 so shall the son of man be three days and three nights in the heart of the earth.
 the men of nineveh shall rise in judgment with this generation and shall condemn it.
 because they repented at the preaching of jonah.
 and behold a greater than jonah is here.
 the queen of the south shall rise up in the judgment with this generation and shall condemn it.
 for she came from the uttermost parts of the earth to hear the wisdom of solomon.
 and behold a greater than solomon is here.
 when the unclean spirit is gone out of a man he walketh through dry places seeking rest and he findeth none.
 then he saith i will return into my house from whence i came out.
 and when he is come he findeth it empty swept and garnished.
 then goeth he and taketh with himself seven other spirits more wicked than himself and they enter in and dwell there.
 and the last state of that man is worse than the first.
 even so shall it be also to this wicked generation.
 while he was yet speaking to the people behold his mother and his brethren stood without desiring to speak with him.
 then one said to him behold thy mother and thy brethren stand without desiring to speak with thee.
 but he answered and said to him that told him who is my mother.
 and who are my brethren.
 and he stretched forth his hand towards his disciples and said behold my mother and my brethren.
 for whoever shall do the will of my father who is in heaven the same is my brother and sister and mother.
 the same day jesus went out of the house and sat by the sea side.
 and great multitudes were gathered to him so that he went into a boat and sat down.
 and the whole multitude stood on the shore.
 and he spoke many things to them in parables saying behold a sower went forth to sow.
 and when he sowed some seeds fell by the way side and the fowls came and devoured them.
 some fell upon stony places where they had not much earth.
 and forthwith they sprung up because they had no deepness of earth.
 and when the sun had risen they were scorched.
 and because they had not root they withered.
 and some fell among thorns.
 and the thorns sprung up and choked them.
 but others fell into good ground and brought forth fruit some a hundredfold some sixtyfold some thirtyfold.
 who hath ears to hear let him hear.
 and the disciples came and said to him why speakest thou to them in parables.
 he answered and said to them because it is given to you to know the mysteries of the kingdom of heaven but to them it is not given.
 for whoever hath to him shall be given and he shall have more abundance.
 but whoever hath not from him shall be taken away even that which he hath.
 therefore i speak to them in parables.
 because they seeing see not.
 and hearing they hear not neither do they understand.
 and in them is fulfilled the prophecy of isaiah which saith by hearing ye shall hear and shall not understand.
 and seeing ye shall see and shall not perceive.
 for this peoples heart is become gross and their ears are dull of hearing and their eyes they have closed.
 lest at any time they should see with their eyes and hear with their ears and should understand with their heart and should be converted and i should heal them.
 but blessed are your eyes for they see.
 and your ears for they hear.
 for verily i say to you that many prophets and righteous men have desired to see the things which ye see and have not seen them .
 and to hear the things which ye hear and have not heard them .
 hear ye therefore the parable of the sower.
 when any one heareth the word of the kingdom and understandeth it not then cometh the wicked one and catcheth away that which was sown in his heart.
 this is he who received seed by the way side.
 but he that received the seed into stony places the same is he that heareth the word and immediately with joy receiveth it.
 yet he hath not root in himself but endureth for a while.
 for when tribulation or persecution ariseth because of the word forthwith he is offended.
 he also that received seed among the thorns is he that heareth the word.
 and the care of this world and the deceitfulness of riches choke the word and he becometh unfruitful.
 but he that receiveth seed into the good ground is he that heareth the word and understandeth it .
 who also beareth fruit and bringeth forth some a hundred fold some sixty some thirty.
 another parable he proposed to them saying the kingdom of heaven is likened to a man who sowed good seed in his field.
 but while men slept his enemy came and sowed tares among the wheat and departed.
 but when the blade had sprung up and brought forth fruit then appeared the tares also.
 so the servants of the householder came and said to him sir didst thou not sow good seed in thy field.
 from whence then hath it tares.
 he said to them an enemy hath done this.
 the servants said to him wilt thou then that we go and gather them.
 but he said no.
 lest while ye gather the tares ye root up also the wheat with them.
 let both grow together until the harvest.
 and in the time of harvest i will say to the reapers gather ye first the tares and bind them in bundles to burn them.
 but gather the wheat into my barn.
 another parable he proposed to them saying the kingdom of heaven is like a grain of mustardseed which a man took and sowed in his field.
 which indeed is the least of all seeds.
 but when it is grown it is the greatest among herbs and becometh a tree so that the birds of the air come and lodge on its branches.
 another parable he spoke to them.
 the kingdom of heaven is like leaven which a woman took and hid in three measures of meal till the whole was leavened.
 all these things jesus spoke to the multitude in parables.
 and without a parable he spoke not to them.
 that it might be fulfilled which was spoken by the prophet saying i will open my mouth in parables.
 i will utter things which have been kept secret from the foundation of the world.
 then jesus sent the multitude away and went into the house.
 and his disciples came to him saying declare to us the parable of the tares of the field.
 he answered and said to them he that soweth the good seed is the son of man.
 the field is the world.
 the good seed are the children of the kingdom.
 but the tares are the children of the wicked one .
 the enemy that sowed them is the devil.
 the harvest is the end of the world.
 and the reapers are the angels.
 as therefore the tares are gathered and burned in the fire.
 so shall it be in the end of this world.
 the son of man shall send forth his angels and they shall gather out of his kingdom all things that offend and them who do iniquity.
 and shall cast them into a furnace of fire.
 there shall be wailing and gnashing of teeth.
 then shall the righteous shine as the sun in the kingdom of their father.
 who hath ears to hear let him hear.
 again the kingdom of heaven is like treasure hid in a field.
 which when a man hath found he hideth and for joy thereof goeth and selleth all that he hath and buyeth that field.
 again the kingdom of heaven is like a merchant seeking goodly pearls.
 who when he had found one pearl of great price went and sold all that he had and bought it.
 again the kingdom of heaven is like a net that was cast into the sea and gathered of every kind.
 which when it was full they drew to the shore and sat down and gathered the good into vessels but cast away the bad.
 so shall it be at the end of the world.
 the angels shall come forth and sever the wicked from among the just and shall cast them into the furnace of fire.
 there shall be wailing and gnashing of teeth.
 jesus saith to them have ye understood all these things.
 they say to him yes lord.
 then said he to them therefore every scribe who is instructed to the kingdom of heaven is like a man that is a householder who bringeth forth out of his treasure things new and old.
 and it came to pass that when jesus had finished these parables he departed thence.
 and when he had come into his own country he taught them in their synagogue so that they were astonished and said whence hath this man this wisdom and these mighty works.
 is not this the carpenters son.
 is not his mother called mary.
 and his brethren james and joses and simon and judas.
 and his sisters are they not all with us.
 whence then hath this man all these things.
 and they were offended in him.
 but jesus said to them a prophet is not without honor save in his own country and in his own house.
 and he did not many mighty works there because of their unbelief.
 at that time herod the tetrarch heard of the fame of jesus and said to his servants this is john the baptist.
 he hath risen from the dead.
 and therefore mighty works do show forth themselves in him.
 for herod had laid hold on john and bound him and put him in prison for the sake of herodias his brother philips wife.
 for john had said to him it is not lawful for thee to have her.
 and when he would have put him to death he feared the multitude because they counted him as a prophet.
 but when herods birthday was kept the daughter of herodias danced before them and pleased herod.
 upon which he promised with an oath to give her whatever she would ask.
 and she being before instructed by her mother said give me here the head of john the baptist in a dish.
 and the king was sorry.
 nevertheless for the sake of the oath and of them who sat with him at table he commanded it to be given her .
 and he sent and beheaded john in the prison.
 and his head was brought in a dish and given to the damsel.
 and she brought it to her mother.
 and his disciples came and took up the body and buried it and went and told jesus.
 when jesus heard of it he departed thence in a boat into a desert place apart.
 and when the people had heard of it they followed him on foot out of the cities.
 and jesus went forth and saw a great multitude and was moved with compassion towards them and he healed their sick.
 and when it was evening his disciples came to him saying this is a desert place and the time is now past.
 send the multitude away that they may go into the villages and buy themselves victuals.
 but jesus said to them they need not depart.
 give ye them to eat.
 and they say to him we have here but five loaves and two fishes.
 he said bring them hither to me.
 and he commanded the multitude to sit down on the grass and took the five loaves and the two fishes and looking up to heaven he blessed and broke and gave the loaves to his disciples and the disciples to the multitude.
 and they all ate and were satisfied.
 and they took up of the fragments that remained twelve baskets full.
 and they that had eaten were about five thousand men besides women and children.
 and immediately jesus constrained his disciples to get into a boat and to go before him to the other side while he sent the multitudes away.
 and when he had sent the multitudes away he ascended a mountain apart to pray.
 and when the evening was come he was there alone.
 but the boat was now in the midst of the sea tossed with waves.
 for the wind was contrary.
 and in the fourth watch of the night jesus went to them walking on the sea.
 and when the disciples saw him walking on the sea they were troubled saying it is a spirit.
 and they cried out for fear.
 but immediately jesus spoke to them saying be of good cheer.
 it is i.
 be not afraid.
 and peter answered him and said lord if it is thou bid me come to thee on the water.
 and he said come.
 and when peter had come down out of the boat he walked on the water to go to jesus.
 but when he saw the wind boisterous he was afraid.
 and beginning to sink he cried saying lord save me.
 and immediately jesus stretched forth his hand and caught him and said to him o thou of little faith why didst thou doubt.
 and when they had come into the boat the wind ceased.
 then they that were in the boat came and worshiped him saying in truth thou art the son of god.
 and when they had gone over they came into the land of gennesaret.
 and when the men of that place had knowledge of him they sent out into all the surrounding country and brought to him all that were diseased.
 and besought him that they might only touch the hem of his garment.
 and as many as touched were restored to health.
 then came to jesus scribes and pharisees who were of jerusalem saying why do thy disciples transgress the tradition of the elders.
 for they wash not their hands when they eat bread.
 but he answered and said to them why do ye also transgress the commandment of god by your tradition.
 for god commanded saying honor thy father and mother.
 and he that curseth father or mother let him die the death.
 but ye say whoever shall say to his father or his mother it is a gift by whatever thou mightest be profited by me.
 and honor not his father or his mother he shall be free .
 thus have ye made the commandment of god of no effect by your tradition.
 ye hypocrites well did isaiah prophesy of you saying this people draw nigh to me with their mouth and honor me with their lips.
 but their heart is far from me.
 but in vain they do worship me teaching for doctrines the commandments of men.
 and he called the multitude and said to them hear and understand.
 not that which goeth into the mouth defileth a man.
 but that which cometh out of the mouth this defileth a man.
 then came his disciples and said to him knowest thou that the pharisees were offended after they heard this saying.
 but he answered and said every plant which my heavenly father hath not planted shall be extirpated.
 let them alone.
 they are blind leaders of the blind.
 and if the blind leadeth the blind both will fall into the ditch.
 then answered peter and said to him declare to us this parable.
 and jesus said are ye also yet without understanding.
 do ye not yet understand that whatever entereth in at the mouth goeth into the belly and is cast out into the draught.
 but those things which proceed out of the mouth come forth from the heart.
 and they defile the man.
 for out of the heart proceed evil thoughts murders adulteries fornications thefts false witness blasphemies.
 these are the things which defile a man.
 but to eat with unwashen hands defileth not a man.
 then jesus went thence and departed into the territories of tyre and sidon.
 and behold a woman of canaan came out of the same territories and cried to him saying have mercy on me o lord thou son of david.
 my daughter is grievously afflicted with a demon.
 but he answered her not a word.
 and his disciples came and besought him saying send her away.
 for she crieth after us.
 but he answered and said i am not sent but to the lost sheep of the house of israel.
 then came she and worshiped him saying lord help me.
 but he answered and said it is not meet to take the childrens bread and to cast it to dogs.
 and she said truth lord.
 yet the dogs eat of the crums which fall from their masters table.
 then jesus answered and said to her o woman great is thy faith.
 be it to thee even as thou wilt.
 and her daughter was healed from that very hour.
 and jesus departed from thence and came nigh to the sea of galilee.
 and ascended a mountain and sat down there.
 and great multitudes came to him having with them those that were lame blind dumb maimed and many others and cast them down at jesus feet.
 and he healed them.
 so that the multitude wondered when they saw the dumb to speak the maimed to be whole the lame to walk and the blind to see.
 and they glorified the god of israel.
 then jesus called his disciples to him and said i have compassion on the multitude because they continue with me now three days and have nothing to eat.
 and i will not send them away fasting lest they faint in the way.
 and his disciples say to him whence should we have so much bread in the wilderness as to satisfy so great a multitude.
 and jesus saith to them how many loaves have ye.
 and they said seven and a few little fishes.
 and he commanded the multitude to sit on the ground.
 and he took the seven loaves and the fishes and gave thanks and broke them and gave to his disciples and the disciples to the multitude.
 and they all ate and were filled.
 and they took up of the fragments that were left seven baskets full.
 and they that had eaten were four thousand men besides women and children.
 and he sent away the multitude and took a boat and came into the borders of magdala.
 the pharisees also and the sadducees came and tempting desired him that he would show them a sign from heaven.
 he answered and said to them when it is evening ye say it will be fair weather.
 for the sky is red.
 and in the morning it will be foul weather today.
 for the sky is red and lowering.
 o ye hypocrites ye can discern the face of the sky.
 but can ye not discern the signs of the times.
 a wicked and adulterous generation seeketh for a sign.
 and there shall no sign been to it but the sign of the prophet jonah.
 and he left them and departed.
 and when his disciples had come to the other side they had forgotten to take bread.
 then jesus said to them take heed and beware of the leaven of the pharisees and of the sadducees.
 and they reasoned among themselves saying it is because we have taken no bread.
 which when jesus perceived he said to them o ye of little faith why reason ye among yourselves because ye have brought no bread.
 do ye not yet understand neither remember the five loaves of the five thousand and how many baskets ye took up.
 neither the seven loaves of the four thousand and how many baskets ye took up.
 how is it that ye do not understand that i spoke not to you concerning bread that ye should beware of the leaven of the pharisees and of the sadducees.
 then they understood that he did not caution them against the leaven of bread but against the doctrine of the pharisees and of the sadducees.
 when jesus came into the borders of cesarea phillippi he asked his disciples saying who do men say that i the son of man am.
 and they said some say that thou art john the baptist.
 some elijah.
 and others jeremiah or one of the prophets.
 he saith to them but who say ye that i am.
 and simon peter answered and said thou art the christ the son of the living god.
 and jesus answered and said to him blessed art thou simonbarjona.
 for flesh and blood hath not revealed it to thee but my father who is in heaven.
 and i say also to thee that thou art peter and upon this rock i will build my church.
 and the gates of hell shall not prevail against it.
 and i will give to thee the keys of the kingdom of heaven.
 and whatever thou shalt bind on earth shall be bound in heaven.
 and whatever thou shalt loose on earth shall be loosed in heaven.
 then he charged his disciples that they should tell no man that he was jesus the christ.
 from that time forth jesus began to show to his disciples that he must go to jerusalem and suffer many things from the elders and chief priests and scribes and be killed and be raised again the third day.
 then peter took him and began to rebuke him saying be it far from thee lord.
 this shall not be to thee.
 but he turned and said to peter get thee behind me satan.
 thou art an offense to me.
 for thou savorest not the things that are of god but those that are of men.
 then said jesus to his disciples if any man will come after me let him deny himself and take up his cross and follow me.
 for whoever will save his life shall lose it.
 and whoever will lose his life for my sake shall find it.
 for what is a man profited if he shall gain the whole world and lose his own soul.
 or what shall a man give in exchange for his soul.
 for the son of man will come in the glory of his father with his angels.
 and then he will reward every man according to his works.
 verily i say to you there are some standing here who shall not taste death till they shall see the son of man coming in his kingdom.
 and after six days jesus taketh peter james and john his brother and bringeth them upon a high mountain apart.
 and he was transfigured before them.
 and his face shone as the sun and his raiment was white as the light.
 and behold there appeared to them moses and elijah talking with him.
 then answered peter and said to jesus lord it is good for us to be here.
 if thou wilt let us make here three tabernacles.
 one for thee and one for moses and one for elijah.
 while he was yet speaking behold a bright cloud overshadowed them.
 and behold a voice out of the cloud which said this is my beloved son in whom i am well pleased.
 hear ye him.
 and when the disciples heard it they fell on their face and were in great fear.
 and jesus came and touched them and said arise and be not afraid.
 and when they had lifted up their eyes they saw no man save jesus only.
 and as they were descending the mountain jesus charged them saying tell the vision to no man until the son of man be raised again from the dead.
 and his disciples asked him saying why then say the scribes that elijah must first come.
 and jesus answered and said to them elijah truly will first come and restore all things.
 but i say to you that elijah is come already and they knew him not but have done to him whatever they pleased.
 likewise will also the son of man suffer by them.
 then the disciples understood that he spoke to them concerning john the baptist.
 and when they had come to the multitude there came to him a certain man kneeling down to him and saying lord have mercy on my son.
 for he is lunatic and grievously distressed.
 for often he falleth into the fire and often into the water.
 and i brought him to thy disciples and they could not cure him.
 then jesus answered and said o faithless and perverse generation how long shall i be with you.
 how long shall i suffer you.
 bring him hither to me.
 and jesus rebuked the demon and he departed out of him.
 and the child was cured from that very hour.
 then came the disciples to jesus apart and said why could not we cast him out.
 and jesus said to them because of your unbelief.
 for verily i say to you if ye have faith as a grain of mustardseed ye shall say to this mountain remove hence to yonder place and it shall remove.
 and nothing shall be impossible to you.
 however this kind goeth not out but by prayer and fasting.
 and while they abode in galilee jesus said to them the son of man will be betrayed into the hands of men.
 and they will kill him and the third day he will be raised again.
 and they were exceedingly grieved.
 and when they had come to capernaum they that received tribute money came to peter and said doth not your master pay tribute.
 he saith yes.
 and when he had come into the house jesus anticipated him saying what thinkest thou simon.
 from whom do the kings of the earth take custom or tribute.
 from their own children or from strangers.
 peter saith to him from strangers.
 jesus saith to him then are the children free.
 notwithstanding lest we should offend them go thou to the sea and cast a hook and take the fish that first cometh up.
 and when thou hast opened his mouth thou shalt find a piece of money.
 take that and give to them for me and thee.
 at the same time came the disciples to jesus saying who is the greatest in the kingdom of heaven.
 and jesus called a little child to him and set him in the midst of them and said verily i say to you except ye be converted and become as little children ye shall not enter into the kingdom of heaven.
 whoever therefore shall humble himself as this little child the same is greatest in the kingdom of heaven.
 and whoever shall receive one such little child in my name receiveth me.
 but whoever shall cause one of these little ones who believe in me to sin it were better for him that a millstone were hanged about his neck and that he were drowned in the depth of the sea.
 woe to the world because of offenses.
 for it must needs be that offenses come.
 but woe to that man by whom the offense cometh.
 wherefore if thy hand or thy foot causeth thee to sin cut them off and cast them from thee.
 it is better for thee to enter into life halt or maimed rather than having two hands or two feet to be cast into everlasting fire.
 and if thy eye causeth thee to sin pluck it out and cast it from thee.
 it is better for thee to enter into life with one eye rather than having two eyes to be cast into hellfire.
 take heed that ye despise not one of these little ones.
 for i say to you that in heaven their angels do always behold the face of my father who is in heaven.
 for the son of man is come to save that which was lost.
 how think ye.
 if a man hath a hundred sheep and one of them is gone astray doth he not leave the ninety and nine and go to the mountains and seek that which is gone astray.
 and if he findeth it verily i say to you he rejoiceth more over that sheep than over the ninety and nine which went not astray.
 even so it is not the will of your father who is in heaven that one of these little ones should perish.
 moreover if thy brother shall trespass against thee go and tell him his fault between thee and him alone.
 if he shall hear thee thou hast gained thy brother.
 but if he will not hear thee then take with thee one or two more that in the mouth of two or three witnesses every word may be established.
 and if he shall neglect to hear them tell it to the church.
 but if he shall neglect to hear the church let him be to thee as a heathen and a publican.
 verily i say to you whatever ye shall bind on earth shall be bound in heaven.
 and whatever ye shall loose on earth shall be loosed in heaven.
 again i say to you that if two of you shall agree on earth concerning any thing that they shall ask it shall be done for them by my father who is in heaven.
 for where two or three are assembled in my name there am i in the midst of them.
 then came peter to him and said lord how often shall my brother sin against me and i forgive him.
 till seven times.
 jesus saith to him i say not to thee until seven times.
 but until seventy times seven.
 therefore is the kingdom of heaven likened to a certain king who would take account of his servants.
 and when he had begun to reckon one was brought to him who owed him ten thousand talents.
 but as he had not ability to pay his lord commanded him to be sold and his wife and children and all that he had and payment to be made.
 the servant therefore fell down and worshiped him saying lord have patience with me and i will pay thee all.
 then the lord of that servant was moved with compassion and loosed him and forgave him the debt.
 but the same servant went out and found one of his fellowservants who owed him a hundred pence.
 and he laid hands on him and took him by the throat saying pay me what thou owest.
 and his fellowservant fell down at his feet and besought him saying have patience with me and i will pay thee all.
 and he would not.
 but went and cast him into prison till he should pay the debt.
 so when his fellowservants saw what was done they were very sorry and came and told to their lord all that was done.
 then his lord having called him said to him o thou wicked servant i forgave thee all that debt because thou desiredst me.
 shouldst thou not also have had compassion on thy fellowservant even as i had pity on thee.
 and his lord was wroth and delivered him to the tormentors till he should pay all that was due to him.
 so likewise shall my heavenly father do to you if ye from your hearts forgive not every one his brother their trespasses.
 and it came to pass that when jesus had finished these sayings he departed from galilee and came into the borders of judea beyond jordan.
 and great multitudes followed him and he healed them there.
 the pharisees also came to him tempting him and saying to him is it lawful for a man to put away his wife for every cause.
 and he answered and said to them have ye not read that he who made them at the beginning made them male and female and said for this cause shall a man leave father and mother and shall cleave to his wife.
 and they two shall be one flesh.
 wherefore they are no more two but one flesh.
 therefore what god hath joined together let not man put asunder.
 they say to him why did moses then command to give a writing of divorcement and to put her away.
 he saith to them moses because of the hardness of your hearts suffered you to put away your wives.
 but from the beginning it was not so.
 and i say to you whoever shall put away his wife except for lewdness and shall marry another committeth adultery.
 and whoever marrieth her who is put away committeth adultery.
 his disciples say to him if the case of the man is so with his wife it is not good to marry.
 but he said to them all men cannot receive this saying save they to whom it is given.
 for there are some eunuchs who were so born from their mothers womb.
 and there are some eunuchs who were made eunuchs by men.
 and there are eunuchs who have made themselves eunuchs for the kingdom of heavens sake.
 he that is able to receive it let him receive it .
 then were brought to him little children that he should put his hands on them and pray.
 and the disciples rebuked them.
 but jesus said suffer little children and forbid them not to come to me.
 for of such is the kingdom of heaven.
 and he laid his hands on them and departed thence.
 and behold one came and said to him good master what good thing shall i do that i may have eternal life.
 and he said to him why callest thou me good.
 there is none good but one that is god.
 but if thou wilt enter into life keep the commandments.
 he saith to him which.
 jesus said thou shalt do no murder thou shalt not commit adultery thou shalt not steal thou shalt not bear false witness honor thy father and thy mother.
 and thou shalt love thy neighbor as thyself.
 the young man saith to him all these things have i kept from my youth.
 what lack i yet.
 jesus said to him if thou wilt be perfect go and sell what thou hast and give to the poor and thou shalt have treasure in heaven.
 and come and follow me.
 but when the young man heard that saying he went away sorrowful.
 for he had great possessions.
 then said jesus to his disciples verily i say to you that a rich man shall with difficulty enter into the kingdom of heaven.
 and again i say to you it is easier for a camel to go through the eye of a needle than for a rich man to enter into the kingdom of god.
 when his disciples heard it they were exceedingly amazed saying who then can be saved.
 but jesus beheld them and said to them with men this is impossible but with god all things are possible.
 then answered peter and said to him behold we have forsaken all and followed thee.
 what shall we have therefore.
 and jesus said to them verily i say to you that ye who have followed me in the regeneration when the son of man shall sit on the throne of his glory ye also shall sit upon twelve thrones judging the twelve tribes of israel.
 and every one that hath forsaken houses or brethren or sisters or father or mother or wife or children or lands for my names sake shall receive a hundredfold and shall inherit everlasting life.
 but many that are first shall be last and the last shall be first.
 for the kingdom of heaven is like to a man that is a householder who went out early in the morning to hire laborers into his vineyard.
 and when he had agreed with the laborers for a penny a day he sent them into his vineyard.
 and he went out about the third hour and saw others standing idle in the marketplace and said to them go ye also into the vineyard.
 and whatever is right i will give you.
 and they departed.
 again he went out about the sixth and ninth hour and did likewise.
 and about the eleventh hour he went out and found others standing idle and saith to them why stand ye here all the day idle.
 they say to him because no man hath hired us.
 he saith to them go ye also into the vineyard.
 and whatever is right that shall ye receive.
 so when evening was come the lord of the vineyard saith to his steward call the laborers and give them their hire beginning from the last to the first.
 and when they came that were hired about the eleventh hour they received every man a penny.
 but when the first came they supposed that they should receive more.
 and they likewise received every man a penny.
 and when they had received it they murmured against the master of the house.
 saying these last have wrought but one hour and thou hast made them equal to us who have borne the burden and heat of the day.
 but he answered one of them and said friend i do thee no wrong.
 didst thou not agree with me for a penny.
 take that which is thine and depart.
 i will give to this last even as to thee.
 is it not lawful for me to do what i will with my own.
 is thy eye evil because i am good.
 so the last shall be first and the first last.
 for many are called but few chosen.
 and jesus going up to jerusalem took the twelve disciples apart in the way and said to them behold we go up to jerusalem.
 and the son of man will be betrayed to the chief priests and to the scribes and they will condemn him to death and will deliver him to the gentiles to mock and to scourge and to crucify him .
 and the third day he will rise again.
 then came to him the mother of zebedees children with her sons worshiping him and desiring a certain thing of him.
 and he said to her what wilt thou.
 she saith to him grant that these my two sons may sit the one on thy right hand and the other on the left in thy kingdom.
 but jesus answered and said ye know not what ye ask.
 are ye able to drink of the cup that i shall drink of and to be baptized with the baptism that i am baptized with.
 they say to him we are able.
 and he saith to them ye shall drink indeed of my cup and be baptized with the baptism that i am baptized with.
 but to sit on my right hand and on my left is not mine to give but it shall be given to them for whom it is prepared by my father.
 and when the ten heard it they were moved with indignation against the two brethren.
 but jesus called them to him and said ye know that the princes of the gentiles exercise dominion over them and they that are great exercise authority upon them.
 but it shall not be so among you.
 but whoever will be great among you let him be your minister.
 and whoever will be chief among you let him be your servant.
 even as the son of man came not to be ministered to but to minister and to give his life a ransom for many.
 and as they departed from jericho a great multitude followed him.
 and behold two blind men sitting by the wayside when they heard that jesus passed by cried out saying have mercy on us o lord thou son of david.
 and the multitude rebuked them that they should hold their peace.
 but they cried the more saying have mercy on us o lord thou son of david.
 and jesus stood still and called them and said what will ye that i shall do to you.
 they say to him lord that our eyes may be opened.
 so jesus had compassion on them and touched their eyes.
 and immediately their eyes received sight and they followed him.
 and when they drew nigh to jerusalem and had come to bethphage to the mount of olives then jesus sent two disciples saying to them go into the village over against you and immediately ye shall find an ass tied and a colt with her loose them and bring them to me.
 and if any man shall say aught to you ye shall say the lord hath need of them.
 and immediately he will send them.
 all this was done that it might be fulfilled which was spoken by the prophet saying tell ye the daughter of sion behold thy king cometh to thee meek and sitting upon an ass and a colt the foal of an ass.
 and the disciples went and did as jesus commanded them and brought the ass and the colt and put on them their clothes and they set him thereon.
 and a very great multitude spread their garments in the way.
 others cut down branches from the trees and strewed them in the way.
 and the multitudes that went before and that followed cried saying hosanna to the son of david.
 blessed is he that cometh in the name of the lord.
 hosanna in the highest.
 and when he had come into jerusalem all the city was moved saying who is this.
 and the multitude said this is jesus the prophet of nazareth of galilee.
 and jesus went into the temple of god and cast out all them that sold and bought in the temple and overthrew the tables of the moneychangers and the seats of them that sold doves.
 and said to them it is written my house shall be called the house of prayer but ye have made it a den of thieves.
 and the blind and the lame came to him in the temple.
 and he healed them.
 and when the chief priests and scribes saw the wonderful things that he did and the children crying in the temple and saying hosanna to the son of david.
 they were greatly displeased and said to him hearest thou what these say.
 and jesus saith to them yes.
 have ye never read out of the mouth of babes and sucklings thou hast perfected praise.
 and he left them and went out of the city into bethany and he lodged there.
 now in the morning as he was returning into the city he was hungry.
 and when he saw a figtree in the way he came to it and found nothing on it but leaves only and said to it let no fruit grow on thee henceforth for ever.
 and immediately the figtree withered.
 and when the disciples saw it they marveled saying how soon is the figtree withered.
 jesus answered and said to them verily i say to you if ye have faith and doubt not ye shall not only do this which is done to the figtree but also if ye shall say to this mountain be thou removed and be thou cast into the sea.
 it shall be done.
 and all things whatever ye shall ask in prayer believing ye shall receive.
 and when he had come into the temple the chief priests and the elders of the people came to him as he was teaching and said by what authority doest thou these things.
 and who gave thee this authority.
 and jesus answered and said to them i also will ask you one thing which if ye tell me i also will tell you by what authority i do these things.
 the baptism of john whence was it.
 from heaven or from men.
 and they reasoned with themselves saying if we shall say from heaven.
 he will say to us why then did ye not believe him.
 but if we shall say from men.
 we fear the people.
 for all hold john as a prophet.
 and they answered jesus and said we cannot tell.
 and he said to them neither do i tell you by what authority i do these things.
 but what think ye.
 a certain man had two sons.
 and he came to the first and said son go work today in my vineyard.
 he answered and said i will not.
 but afterward he repented and went.
 and he came to the second and said likewise.
 and he answered and said i go sir.
 and went not.
 which of the two did the will of his father.
 they say to him the first.
 jesus saith to them verily i say to you that the publicans and the harlots go into the kingdom of god before you.
 for john came to you in the way of righteousness and ye believed him not.
 but the publicans and the harlots believed him.
 and ye when ye had seen it repented not afterward that ye might believe him.
 hear another parable.
 there was a certain householder who planted a vineyard and hedged it around and digged a winepress in it and built a tower and let it out to husbandmen and went into a remote country.
 and when the time of the fruit drew near he sent his servants to the husbandmen that they might receive the fruits of it.
 and the husbandmen took his servants and beat one and killed another and stoned another.
 again he sent other servants more than the first.
 and they did to them in like manner.
 but last of all he sent to them his son saying they will reverence my son.
 but when the husbandmen saw the son they said among themselves this is the heir.
 come let us kill him and let us seize on his inheritance.
 and they caught him and cast him out of the vineyard and slew him .
 when therefore the lord of the vineyard cometh what will he do to those husbandmen.
 they say to him he will miserably destroy those wicked men and will let out his vineyard to other husbandmen who will render him the fruits in their seasons.
 jesus saith to them did ye never read in the scriptures the stone which the builders rejected the same is become the head of the corner.
 this is the lords doing and it is marvelous in our eyes.
 therefore i say to you the kingdom of god shall be taken from you and given to a nation bringing forth the fruits of it.
 and whoever shall fall on this stone shall be broken.
 but on whomsoever it shall fall it will grind him to powder.
 and when the chief priests and pharisees had heard his parables they perceived that he spoke of them.
 but when they sought to lay hands on him they feared the multitude because they took him for a prophet.
 and jesus answered and spoke to them again by parables and said the kingdom of heaven is like to a certain king who made a marriage for his son and sent his servants to call them that were invited to the wedding.
 and they would not come.
 again he sent other servants saying tell them who are invited behold i have prepared my dinner.
 my oxen and my fatlings are killed and all things are ready.
 come to the marriage.
 but they made light of it and went one to his farm another to his merchandise.
 and the remnant took his servants and treated them spitefully and slew them .
 but when the king heard of it he was wroth.
 and he sent his armies and destroyed those murderers and burned up their city.
 then he saith to his servants the wedding is ready but they who were invited were not worthy.
 go ye therefore into the highways and as many as ye shall find invite to the marriage.
 so those servants went out into the highways and collected all as many as they found both bad and good.
 and the wedding was furnished with guests.
 and when the king came in to see the guests he saw there a man who had not a weddinggarment.
 and he saith to him friend how camest thou in hither not having a weddinggarment.
 and he was speechless.
 then said the king to the servants bind him hand and foot and take him away and cast him into utter darkness.
 there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth.
 for many are called but few are chosen.
 then went the pharisees and took counsel how they might entangle him in his talk.
 and they sent out to him their disciples with the herodians saying master we know that thou art true and teachest the way of god in truth neither carest thou for any man .
 for thou regardest not the person of men.
 tell us therefore what thinkest thou.
 is it lawful to give tribute to cesar or not.
 but jesus perceived their wickedness and said why tempt ye me ye hypocrites.
 show me the tributemoney.
 and they brought to him a penny.
 and he saith to them whose is this image and superscription.
 they say to him cesars.
 then saith he to them render therefore to cesar the things which are cesars.
 and to god the things that are gods.
 when they had heard these words they marveled and left him and departed.
 the same day came to him the sadducees who say that there is no resurrection and asked him saying master moses said if a man shall die having no children his brother shall marry his wife and raise up seed to his brother.
 now there were with us seven brothers.
 and the first when he had married a wife deceased.
 and having no issue left his wife to his brother.
 likewise the second also and the third to the seventh.
 and last of all the woman died also.
 therefore in the resurrection whose wife shall she be of the seven.
 for they all had her.
 jesus answered and said to them ye do err not knowing the scriptures nor the power of god.
 for in the resurrection they neither marry nor are given in marriage but are as the angels of god in heaven.
 but as concerning the resurrection of the dead have ye not read that which was spoken to you by god saying i am the god of abraham and the god of isaac and the god of jacob.
 god is not the god of the dead but of the living.
 and when the multitude heard this they were astonished at his doctrine.
 but when the pharisees had heard that he had put the sadducees to silence they were assembled about him.
 then one of them who was a lawyer asked him a question tempting him and saying master which is the great commandment in the law.
 jesus said to him thou shalt love the lord thy god with all thy heart and with all thy soul and with all thy mind.
 this is the first and great commandment.
 and the second is like it thou shalt love thy neighbor as thyself.
 on these two commandments hang all the law and the prophets.
 while the pharisees were assembled jesus asked them saying what think ye of christ.
 whose son is he.
 they say to him the son of david.
 he saith to them how then doth david in spirit call him lord saying the lord said to my lord sit thou on my right hand till i make thy enemies thy footstool.
 if david then calleth him lord how is he his son.
 and no man was able to answer him a word neither durst any man from that day forth ask him any more questions.
 then jesus spoke to the multitude and to his disciples saying the scribes and the pharisees sit in mosess seat.
 all therefore whatever they bid you observe that observe and do.
 but do not ye according to their works.
 for they say and do not.
 for they bind heavy burdens and grievous to be borne and lay them on mens shoulders.
 but they themselves will not move them with one of their fingers.
 but all their works they do to be seen by men.
 they make broad their phylacteries and enlarge the borders of their garments and love the uppermost rooms at feasts and the chief seats in the synagogues and greetings in the markets and to be called by men rabbi rabbi.
 but be not ye called rabbi.
 for one is your master even christ.
 and all ye are brethren.
 and call no man your father upon the earth.
 for one is your father who is in heaven.
 neither be ye called masters.
 for one is your master even christ.
 but he that is greatest among you shall be your servant.
 and whoever shall exalt himself shall be abased.
 and he that shall humble himself shall be exalted.
 but woe to you scribes and pharisees.
 hypocrites.
 for ye shut up the kingdom of heaven against men.
 for ye neither go in yourselves neither suffer ye them that are entering to go in.
 woe to you scribes and pharisees hypocrites.
 for ye devour widows houses and for a pretense make long prayer.
 therefore ye shall receive the greater damnation.
 woe to you scribes and pharisees hypocrites.
 for ye compass sea and land to make one proselyte and when he is made ye make him twofold more the child of hell than yourselves.
 woe to you ye blind guides who say whoever shall swear by the temple it is nothing.
 but whoever shall swear by the gold of the temple he is a debtor.
 ye fools and blind.
 for which is greater the gold or the temple that sanctifieth the gold.
 and whoever shall swear by the altar it is nothing.
 but whoever sweareth by the gift that is upon it he is guilty.
 ye fools and blind.
 for which is greater the gift or the altar that sanctifieth the gift.
 whoever therefore shall swear by the altar sweareth by it and by all things upon it.
 and whoever shall swear by the temple sweareth by it and by him that dwelleth in it.
 and he that shall swear by heaven sweareth by the throne of god and by him that sitteth upon it.
 woe to you scribes and pharisees hypocrites.
 for ye pay tithe of mint and anise and cummin and have omitted the weightier matters of the law judgment mercy and faith.
 these ye ought to have done and not to leave the others undone.
 ye blind guides who strain out a gnat and swallow a camel.
 woe to you scribes and pharisees hypocrites.
 for ye make clean the outside of the cup and of the platter but within they are full of extortion and excess.
 thou blind pharisee cleanse first that which is within the cup and platter that the outside of them may be clean also.
 woe to you scribes and pharisees hypocrites.
 for ye are like whitened sepulchers which indeed appear beautiful outward but are within full of dead mens bones and of all uncleanness.
 thus ye also outwardly appear righteous to men but within ye are full of hypocrisy and iniquity.
 woe to you scribes and pharisees hypocrites.
 because ye build the tombs of the prophets and garnish the sepulchers of the righteous and say if we had been in the days of our fathers we would not have been partakers with them in the blood of the prophets.
 wherefore ye are witnesses to yourselves that ye are the children of them who killed the prophets.
 fill ye up then the measure of your fathers.
 ye serpents ye generation of vipers how can ye escape the damnation of hell.
 wherefore behold i send to you prophets and wise men and scribes.
 and some of them ye will kill and crucify and some of them ye will scourge in your synagogues and persecute them from city to city.
 that upon you may come all the righteous blood shed upon the earth from the blood of righteous abel to the blood of zacharias son of barachias whom ye slew between the temple and the altar.
 verily i say to you all these things shall come upon this generation.
 o jerusalem jerusalem thou that killest the prophets and stonest them who are sent to thee how often would i have gathered thy children even as a hen gathereth her chickens under her wings and ye would not.
 behold your house is left to you desolate.
 for i say to you ye shall not see me henceforth till ye shall say blessed is he that cometh in the name of the lord.
 and jesus went out and departed from the temple.
 and his disciples came to him to show him the buildings of the temple.
 and jesus said to them see ye not all these things.
 verily i say to you there shall not be left here one stone upon another that shall not be thrown down.
 and as he sat upon the mount of olives the disciples came to him privately saying tell us when will these things be.
 and what will be the sign of thy coming and of the end of the world.
 and jesus answered and said to them take heed that no man deceive you.
 for many will come in my name saying i am christ.
 and will deceive many.
 and ye will hear of wars and rumors of wars.
 see that ye be not troubled.
 for all these things must come to pass but the end is not yet.
 for nation will rise against nation and kingdom against kingdom.
 and there will be famines and pestilences and earthquakes in divers places.
 all these are the beginning of sorrows.
 then will they deliver you up to be afflicted and will kill you.
 and ye will be hated by all nations for my names sake.
 and then will many be offended and will betray one another and will hate one another.
 and many false prophets will rise and will deceive many.
 and because iniquity will abound the love of many will become cold.
 but he that shall endure to the end the same shall be saved.
 and this gospel of the kingdom shall be preached in all the world for a testimony to all nations.
 and then shall the end come.
 when therefore ye shall see the abomination of desolation spoken of by daniel the prophet stand in the holy place whoever readeth let him understand then let them who are in judea flee to the mountains.
 let him who is on the housetop not come down to take any thing out of his house.
 neither let him who is in the field return back to take his clothes.
 and woe to them that are with child and to them that nurse infants in those days.
 but pray ye that your flight may not be in the winter neither on the sabbath.
 for then shall be great tribulation such as hath not been since the beginning of the world to this time no nor ever shall be.
 and except those days should be shortened there would no flesh be saved.
 but for the elects sake those days shall be shortened.
 then if any man shall say to you lo here is christ or there.
 believe it not.
 for false christs will arise and false prophets and will show great signs and wonders.
 so that if it were possible they would deceive the very elect.
 behold i have told you before.
 wherefore if they shall say to you behold he is in the desert.
 go not forth.
 behold he is in the secret chambers.
 believe it not.
 for as the lightning cometh out of the east and shineth even to the west.
 so shall also the coming of the son of man be.
 for wherever the carcass is there will the eagles be collected.
 immediately after the tribulation of those days shall the sun be darkened and the moon shall not give her light and the stars shall fall from heaven and the powers of the heavens shall be shaken.
 and then shall appear the sign of the son of man in heaven.
 and then shall all the tribes of the earth mourn and they shall see the son of man coming in the clouds of heaven with power and great glory.
 and he will send his angels with a great sound of a trumpet and they will gather his elect from the four winds from one end of heaven to the other.
 now learn a parable of the figtree.
 when its branch is yet tender and putteth forth leaves ye know that summer is nigh.
 so likewise ye when ye shall see all these things know that it is near even at the doors.
 verily i say to you this generation shall not pass till all these things shall be fulfilled.
 heaven and earth shall pass away but my words shall not pass away.
 but of that day and hour knoweth no man no not the angels of heaven but my father only.
 but as the days of noah were so will also the coming of the son of man be.
 for as in the days that were before the flood they were eating and drinking marrying and giving in marriage until the day that noah entered into the ark and knew not until the flood came and took them all away.
 so also will be the coming of the son of man.
 then will two be in the field.
 the one shall be taken and the other left.
 two women will be grinding at the mill.
 the one shall be taken and the other left.
 watch therefore.
 for ye know not what hour your lord cometh.
 but know this that if the master of the house knew in what watch the thief would come he would watch and would not suffer his house to be broken up.
 therefore be ye also ready.
 for in such an hour as ye think not the son of man cometh.
 who then is a faithful and wise servant whom his lord hath made ruler over his household to give them food in due season.
 blessed is that servant whom his lord when he cometh shall find so doing.
 verily i say to you that he will make him ruler over all his goods.
 but if that evil servant shall say in his heart my lord delayeth his coming.
 and shall begin to beat his fellowservants and to eat and drink with the drunken.
 the lord of that servant will come in a day when he looketh not for him and in an hour that he is not aware of and will cut him asunder and appoint him his portion with the hypocrites.
 there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth.
 then shall the kingdom of heaven be likened to ten virgins who took their lamps and went forth to meet the bridegroom.
 and five of them were wise and five were foolish.
 they that were foolish took their lamps and took no oil with them.
 but the wise took oil in their vessels with their lamps.
 while the bridegroom tarried they all slumbered and slept.
 and at midnight there was a cry made behold the bridegroom cometh.
 go ye out to meet him.
 then all those virgins arose and trimmed their lamps.
 and the foolish said to the wise give us of your oil.
 for our lamps are gone out.
 but the wise answered saying not so .
 lest there be not enough for us and you.
 but go ye rather to them that sell and buy for yourselves.
 and while they were going to buy the bridegroom came.
 and they that were ready went in with him to the marriage and the door was shut.
 afterward came also the other virgins saying lord lord open to us.
 but he answered and said verily i say to you i know you not.
 watch therefore for ye know neither the day nor the hour in which the son of man cometh.
 for the kingdom of heaven is as a man traveling into a far country who called his own servants and delivered to them his goods.
 and to one he gave five talents to another two and to another one.
 to every man according to his several ability.
 and forthwith took his journey.
 then he that had received the five talents went and traded with the same and gained other five talents.
 and likewise he that had received two he also gained other two.
 but he that had received one went and digged in the earth and hid his lords money.
 after a long time the lord of those servants cometh and reckoneth with them.
 and he that had received five talents came and brought other five talents saying lord thou deliveredst to me five talents.
 behold i have gained besides them five talents more.
 his lord said to him well done thou good and faithful servant.
 thou hast been faithful over a few things i will make thee ruler over many things.
 enter thou into the joy of thy lord.
 he also that had received two talents came and said lord thou deliveredst to me two talents.
 behold i have gained two other talents besides them.
 his lord said to him well done good and faithful servant.
 thou hast been faithful over a few things i will make thee ruler over many things.
 enter thou into the joy of thy lord.
 then he who had received the one talent came and said lord i knew thee that thou art a hard man reaping where thou hast not sown and gathering where thou hast not strewed.
 and i was afraid and went and hid thy talent in the earth.
 lo there thou hast what is thine.
 his lord answered and said to him thou wicked and slothful servant thou knewest that i reap where i have not sown and gather where i have not strewed.
 thou oughtest therefore to have put my money to the exchangers and then at my coming i should have received my own with interest.
 take therefore the talent from him and give it to him who hath ten talents.
 for to every one that hath shall be given and he shall have abundance.
 but from him that hath not shall be taken away even that which he hath.
 and cast ye the unprofitable servant into utter darkness.
 there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth.
 when the son of man shall come in his glory and all the holy angels with him then will he sit upon the throne of his glory.
 and before him shall be gathered all nations.
 and he will separate them one from another as a shepherd divideth his sheep from the goats.
 and he will set the sheep on his right hand but the goats on the left.
 then will the king say to them on his right hand come ye blessed of my father inherit the kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the world.
 for i was hungry and ye gave me food.
 i was thirsty and ye gave me drink.
 i was a stranger and ye took me in.
 naked and ye clothed me.
 i was sick and ye visited me.
 i was in prison and ye came to me.
 then will the righteous answer him saying lord when saw we thee hungry and fed thee .
 or thirsty and gave thee drink.
 when saw we thee a stranger and took thee in.
 or naked and clothed thee .
 or when saw we thee sick or in prison and came to thee.
 and the king will answer and say to them verily i say to you inasmuch as ye have done it to one of the least of these my brethren ye have done it to me.
 then will he say also to them on the left hand depart from me ye cursed into everlasting fire prepared for the devil and his angels.
 for i was hungry and ye gave me no food.
 i was thirsty and ye gave me no drink.
 i was a stranger and ye took me not in.
 naked and ye clothed me not.
 sick and in prison and ye visited me not.
 then will they also answer him saying lord when saw we thee hungry or thirsty or a stranger or naked or sick or in prison and did not minister to thee.
 then will he answer them saying verily i say to you inasmuch as ye did it not to one of the least of these ye did it not to me.
 and these shall go away into everlasting punishment.
 but the righteous into life eternal.
 and it came to pass when jesus had finished all these sayings he said to his disciples ye know that after two days is the passover and the son of man is betrayed to be crucified.
 then assembled the chief priests and the scribes and the elders of the people in the palace of the high priest who was called caiaphas and consulted that they might take jesus by subtilty and kill him .
 but they said not on the feast day lest there be an uproar among the people.
 now when jesus was in bethany in the house of simon the leper there came to him a woman having an alabasterbox of very precious ointment and poured it on his head as he sat at table .
 but when his disciples saw it they had indignation saying to what purpose is this waste.
 for this ointment might have been sold for much and given to the poor.
 when jesus understood it he said to them why trouble ye the woman.
 for she hath wrought a good work upon me.
 for ye have the poor always with you.
 but me ye have not always.
 for in that she hath poured this ointment on my body she did it for my burial.
 verily i say to you wherever this gospel shall be preached in the whole world there shall also this which this woman hath done be told for a memorial of her.
 then one of the twelve called judas iscariot went to the chief priests and said what will ye give me and i will deliver him to you.
 and they covenanted with him for thirty pieces of silver.
 and from that time he sought opportunity to betray him.
 now the first day of the feast of unleavened bread the disciples came to jesus saying to him where wilt thou that we prepare for thee to eat the passover.
 and he said go into the city to such a man and say to him the master saith my time is at hand.
 i will keep the passover at thy house with my disciples.
 and the disciples did as jesus had appointed them.
 and they made ready the passover.
 now when the evening was come he sat down with the twelve.
 and as they were eating he said verily i say to you that one of you will betray me.
 and they were exceeding sorrowful and began every one of them to say to him lord is it i.
 and he answered and said he that dippeth his hand with me in the dish the same will betray me.
 the son of man goeth as it is written concerning him.
 but woe to that man by whom the son of man is betrayed.
 it had been good for that man if he had not been born.
 then judas who betrayed him answered and said master is it i.
 he said to him thou hast said.
 and as they were eating jesus took bread and blessed it and broke it and gave it to the disciples and said take eat.
 this is my body.
 and he took the cup and gave thanks and gave it to them saying drink ye all of it.
 for this is my blood of the new testament which is shed for many for the remission of sin.
 but i say to you i will not drink henceforth of this fruit of the vine until that day when i drink it new with you in my fathers kingdom.
 and when they had sung a hymn they went out to the mount of olives.
 then saith jesus to them all ye shall be offended because of me this night.
 for it is written i will smite the shepherd and the sheep of the flock shall be scattered abroad.
 but after i am risen again i will go before you into galilee.
 peter answered and said to him though all men shall be offended because of thee yet will i never be offended.
 jesus said to him verily i say to thee that this night before the cock shall crow thou wilt deny me thrice.
 peter said to him though i should die with thee yet will i not deny thee.
 likewise also said all the disciples.
 then cometh jesus with them to a place called gethsemane and saith to the disciples sit ye here while i go yonder and pray.
 and he took with him peter and the two sons of zebedee and began to be sorrowful and very heavy.
 then saith he to them my soul is exceeding sorrowful even to death.
 tarry ye here and watch with me.
 and he went a little further and fell on his face and prayed saying o my father if it is possible let this cup pass from me.
 nevertheless not as i will but as thou wilt .
 and he cometh to the disciples and findeth them asleep and saith to peter what could ye not watch with me one hour.
 watch and pray that ye enter not into temptation.
 the spirit indeed is willing but the flesh is weak.
 he went away again the second time and prayed saying o my father if this cup may not pass away from me except i drink it thy will be done.
 and he came and found them asleep again.
 for their eyes were heavy.
 and he left them and went away again and prayed the third time saying the same words.
 then he cometh to his disciples and saith to them sleep on now and take your rest.
 behold the hour is at hand and the son of man is betrayed into the hands of sinners.
 rise let us be going.
 behold he is at hand that doth betray me.
 and while he was yet speaking lo judas one of the twelve came and with him a great multitude with swords and staffs from the chief priests and elders of the people.
 now he that betrayed him gave them a sign saying whomsoever i shall kiss that same is he.
 hold him fast.
 and forthwith he came to jesus and said hail master.
 and kissed him.
 and jesus said to him friend why art thou come.
 then they came and laid hands on jesus and took him.
 and behold one of them who were with jesus stretched out his hand and drew his sword and struck a servant of the high priest and smote off his ear.
 then said jesus to him put up again thy sword into its place.
 for all they that take the sword shall perish by the sword.
 thinkest thou that i cannot now pray to my father and he will presently give me more than twelve legions of angels.
 but how then shall the scriptures be fulfilled that thus it must be.
 in that same hour said jesus to the multitudes are ye come out as against a thief with swords and staffs to take me.
 i sat daily with you teaching in the temple and ye laid no hold on me.
 but all this was done that the scriptures of the prophets might be fulfilled.
 then all the disciples forsook him and fled.
 and they that had laid hold on jesus led him away to caiaphas the high priest where the scribes and the elders were assembled.
 but peter followed him at a distance to the high priests palace and went in and sat with the servants to see the end.
 now the chief priests and elders and all the council sought false testimony against jesus to put him to death.
 but found none.
 and though many false witnesses came yet found they none.
 at the last came two false witnesses and said this man said i am able to destroy the temple of god and to build it in three days.
 and the high priest arose and said to him answerest thou nothing what is it which these testify against thee.
 but jesus held his peace.
 and the high priest answered and said to him i adjure thee by the living god that thou tell us whether thou art the christ the son of god.
 jesus saith to him thou hast said.
 nevertheless i say to you hereafter shall ye see the son of man sitting on the right hand of power and coming in the clouds of heaven.
 then the high priest rent his clothes saying he hath spoken blasphemy.
 what further need have we of witnesses.
 behold now ye have heard his blasphemy.
 what think ye.
 they answered and said he is guilty of death.
 then they spit in his face and buffetted him.
 and others smote him with the palms of their hands saying prophesy to us thou christ who is he that smote thee.
 now peter sat without in the palace.
 and a damsel came to him saying thou also wast with jesus of galilee.
 but he denied before them all saying i know not what thou sayest.
 and when he had gone out into the porch another maid saw him and said to them that were there this man was also with jesus of nazareth.
 and again he denied with an oath i do not know the man.
 and after a while came to him they that stood by and said to peter surely thou also art one of them.
 for thy speech betrayeth thee.
 then began he to curse and to swear saying i know not the man.
 and immediately the cock crowed.
 and peter remembered the word of jesus who said to him before the cock shall crow thou wilt deny me thrice.
 and he went out and wept bitterly.
 when the morning was come all the chief priests and elders of the people took counsel against jesus to put him to death.
 and when they had bound him they led him away and delivered him to pontius pilate the governor.
 then judas who had betrayed him when he saw that he was condemned repented and brought again the thirty pieces of silver to the chief priests and elders saying i have sinned in that i have betrayed innocent blood.
 and they said what is that to us.
 see thou to that .
 and he cast down the pieces of silver in the temple and departed and went and hanged himself.
 and the chief priests took the silver pieces and said it is not lawful to put them into the treasury because it is the price of blood.
 and they took counsel and bought with them the potters field to bury strangers in.
 wherefore that field has been called the field of blood to this day.
 then was fulfilled that which was spoken by jeremiah the prophet saying and they took the thirty pieces of silver the price of him that was valued whom they of the children of israel did value.
 and gave them for the potters field as the lord appointed me.
 and jesus stood before the governor.
 and the governor asked him saying art thou the king of the jews.
 and jesus said to him thou sayest.
 and when he was accused by the chief priests and elders he answered nothing.
 then saith pilate to him hearest thou not how many things they testify against thee.
 and he answered him to not a word.
 so that the governor marveled greatly.
 now at that feast the governor was wont to release to the people a prisoner whom they would.
 and they had then a notable prisoner called barabbas.
 therefore when they were assembled pilate said to them whom will ye that i release to you.
 barabbas or jesus who is called christ.
 for he knew that for envy they had delivered him.
 when he was sitting on the judgmentseat his wife sent to him saying have thou nothing to do with that just man.
 for i have suffered many things this day in a dream because of him.
 but the chief priests and elders persuaded the multitude that they should ask barabbas and destroy jesus.
 the governor answered and said to them which of the two will ye that i release to you.
 they said barabbas.
 pilate saith to them what shall i do then with jesus who is called christ.
 they all say to him let him be crucified.
 and the governor said why what evil hath he done.
 but they cried out the more saying let him be crucified.
 when pilate saw that he could not prevail at all but that rather a tumult was made he took water and washed his hands before the multitude saying i am innocent of the blood of this just person.
 see ye to it .
 then answered all the people and said his blood be on us and on our children.
 then he released barabbas to them.
 and when he had scourged jesus he delivered him to be crucified.
 then the soldiers of the governor took jesus into the common hall and gathered to him the whole band of soldiers .
 and they stripped him and put on him a scarlet robe.
 and when they had platted a crown of thorns they put it upon his head and a reed in his right hand.
 and they bowed the knee before him and mocked him saying hail king of the jews.
 and they spit upon him and took the reed and struck him on the head.
 and after that they had mocked him they took the robe off from him and put his own raiment on him and led him away to crucify him .
 and as they came out they found a man of cyrene simon by name.
 him they constrained to bear his cross.
 and when they had come to a place called golgotha that is to say a place of a skull they gave him vinegar to drink mingled with gall.
 and when he had tasted of it he would not drink.
 and they crucified him and parted his garments casting lots.
 that it might be fulfilled which was spoken by the prophet they parted my garments among them and upon my vesture they cast lots.
 and sitting down they watched him there.
 and set up over his head his accusation written this is jesus the king of the jews.
 then were there two thieves crucified with him.
 one on the right hand and another on the left.
 and they that passed by reviled him wagging their heads and saying thou that destroyest the temple and buildest it in three days save thyself.
 if thou art the son of god come down from the cross.
 likewise also the chief priests mocking him with the scribes and elders said he saved others.
 himself he cannot save.
 if he is king of israel let him now come down from the cross and we will believe him.
 he trusted in god.
 let him deliver him now if he will have him.
 for he said i am the son of god.
 the thieves also who were crucified with him cast the same in his teeth.
 now from the sixth hour there was darkness over all the land to the ninth hour.
 and about the ninth hour jesus cried with a loud voice saying eli eli lama sabachthani.
 that is to say my god my god why hast thou forsaken me.
 some of them that stood there when they heard that said this man calleth for elijah.
 and immediately one of them ran and took a spunge and filled it with vinegar and put it on a reed and gave him to drink.
 the rest said forbear let us see whether elijah will come to save him.
 jesus when he had cried again with a loud voice expired.
 and behold the vail of the temple was rent in two from the top to the bottom.
 and the earth shook and the rocks rent.
 and the graves were opened and many bodies of saints who slept arose and came out of the graves after his resurrection and went into the holy city and appeared to many.
 now when the centurion and they that were with him watching jesus saw the earthquake and those things that were done they feared greatly saying truly this was the son of god.
 and many women were there beholding at a distance who followed jesus from galilee ministering to him.
 among whom was mary magdalene and mary the mother of james and joses and the mother of zebedees children.
 when the evening was come there came a rich man of arimathea named joseph who also himself was a disciple of jesus.
 he went to pilate and begged the body of jesus.
 then pilate commanded the body to be delivered.
 and when joseph had taken the body he wrapped it in a clean linen cloth and laid it in his own new tomb which he had hewn out in the rock.
 and he rolled a great stone to the door of the sepulcher and departed.
 and there was mary magdalene and the other mary sitting over against the sepulcher.
 now the next day that followed the day of the preparation the chief priests and pharisees came together to pilate saying sir we remember that that deceiver said while he was yet alive after three days i will rise again.
 command therefore that the sepulcher be made secure until the third day lest his disciples come by night and steal him away and say to the people he is risen from the dead.
 so the last error will be worse than the first.
 pilate said to them ye have a watch.
 go make it as secure as ye can.
 so they went and having sealed the stone made the sepulcher secure with a watch.
 in the end of the sabbath as it began to dawn towards the first day of the week came mary magdalene and the other mary to see the sepulcher.
 and behold there was a great earthquake.
 for the angel of the lord descended from heaven and came and rolled back the stone from the door and sat upon it.
 his countenance was like lightning and his raiment white as snow.
 and for fear of him the keepers trembled and became as dead men .
 and the angel answered and said to the women fear ye not.
 for i know that ye seek jesus who was crucified.
 he is not here.
 for he is risen as he said.
 come see the place where the lord lay.
 and go quickly and tell his disciples that he is risen from the dead and behold he goeth before you into galilee.
 there shall ye see him.
 lo i have told you.
 and they departed quickly from the sepulcher with fear and great joy.
 and ran to bring word to his disciples.
 and as they were going to tell his disciples behold jesus met them saying all hail.
 and they came and held him by the feet and worshiped him.
 then said jesus to them be not afraid.
 go tell my brethren that they go into galilee and there shall they see me.
 now when they were going behold some of the watch came into the city and showed to the chief priests all the things that had been done.
 and when they were assembled with the elders and had taken counsel they gave a large sum of money to the soldiers saying say ye his disciples came by night and stole him away while we slept.
 and if this shall come to the governors ears we will persuade him and secure you.
 so they took the money and did as they were instructed.
 and this saying is commonly reported among the jews until this day.
 then the eleven disciples went away into galilee to a mountain where jesus had appointed them.
 and when they saw him they worshiped him.
 but some doubted.
 and jesus came and spoke to them saying all power is given to me in heaven and upon earth.
 go ye therefore and teach all nations baptizing them in the name of the father and of the son and of the holy spirit.
 teaching them to observe all things whatever i have commanded you.
 and lo i am with you always even to the end of the world.
 amen.
 