this is the boke of the generacion of iesus christ ye sonne of dauid the sonne of abraham.
 abraha begat isaac.
 isaac begat iacob.
 iacob begat iudas his brethre.
 iudas begat phares zara of thamar.
 phares begat hesrom.
 hesrom begat aram.
 aram begat aminadab.
 aminadab begat naasson.
 naasson begat salmon.
 salmon begat boos of rahab.
 boos begat obed of ruth.
 obed begat iesse.
 iesse begat dauid the kynge.
 dauid the kynge begat salomon of her that was the wyfe of vry.
 salomon begat roboam.
 roboam begat abia.
 abia begat asa.
 asa begat iosaphat.
 iosaphat begat ioram.
 ioram begat osias.
 osias begat ioatham.
 ioatham begat achas.
 achas begat ezechias.
 ezechias begat manasses.
 manasses begat amon.
 amon begat iosias.
 iosias begat iechonias and his brethren aboute the tyme of the captiuyte of babylon.
 and after the captiuyte of babylon iechonias begat salathiel.
 salathiel begat zorobabel.
 zorobabel begat abiud.
 abiud begat eliachim.
 eliachim begat azor.
 azor begat sadoc.
 sadoc begat achin.
 achin begat eliud.
 eliud begat eleasar.
 eleasar begat matthan.
 matthan begat iacob.
 iacob begat ioseph the hussbande of mary of who was borne that iesus which is called christ.
 all the generacions from abraha to dauid are fourtene generacions.
 from dauid vnto the captiuite of babylon are fourtene generacions.
 from the captiuite of babylon vnto christ are also fourtene generacions.
 the byrth of christ was on thys wyse.
 when his mother mary was maried to ioseph before they came together she was foude with chylde by ye holy goost but ioseph her hussbande was a perfect man and wolde not bringe her to shame but was mynded to put her awaie secretely.
 neuertheles whyle he thus thought beholde the angell of the lorde appered vnto him in a dreame saynge.
 ioseph thou sonne of dauid feare not to take vnto the mary thy wyfe.
 for that which is coceaued in her is of ye holy goost.
 she shall brynge forth a sonne and thou shalt call his name iesus.
 for he shall saue his people from their synnes.
 all this was done yt the thinge might be fulfilled which was spoken of the lorde by the prophet saynge.
 beholde a mayde shall be with chylde and shall brynge forth a sonne and they shall call his name emanuel which is by interpretacion god wt vs.
 now whan ioseph awoke out of slepe he did as the angell of ye lorde bade hym and toke his wyfe vnto hym and knewe her not tyll she had brought forth hir fyrst borne sonne and called his name iesus.
 when iesus was borne at bethlee in iury in the tyme of herode the kynge beholde there came wyse men from the east to ierusale saynge.
 where is the new borne kynge of the iues.
 we haue sene his starre in the east and are come to worship him.
 when herode ye kynge had herde thys he was troubled all ierusale with hym and he gathered all the hye prestes and scribes of ye people axed of them where christ shulde be borne.
 and they sayde vnto hym.
 at bethleem in iury.
 for thus it is written by the prophet.
 and thou bethleem in the londe of iury art not the leest amonge the princes of iuda.
 for out of ye shall come vnto me the captayne that shall gouerne my people israel.
 then herod preuely called the wyse men and dyligently enquyred of them what tyme the starre appered and sent them to bethleem sainge.
 go and searche dyligently for the chylde.
 and when ye haue founde hym bringe me worde agayne that i maye come and worshippe hym also.
 when they had heard the kynge they departed.
 and lo the starre which they sawe in the east went before them tyll it came and stode ouer the place where the chylde was.
 when they sawe the starre they were maruelously glad.
 and went into the house and found the chylde with mary his mother and kneled downe and worshipped hym opened ther treasures and offred vnto hym gyftes.
 gold franckynsence and myrre.
 and after they were warned of god in a dreame that they shuld not go ageine to herod they returned into their awne countre another waye.
 when they were departed.
 beholde the angell of the lorde appered to ioseph in a dreame sayinge.
 aryse and take the chylde and his mother and flye into egypte and abyde there tyll i brynge the worde.
 for herod wyl seke the chylde to destroye hym.
 the he arose and toke the chylde and his mother by night and departed into egypte and was there vnto ye deeth of herod that the thinge might be fulfylled which was spoke of the lorde by the prophet which sayeth.
 out of egypte haue i called my sonne.
 then herod perceauynge yt he was disceaued of the wyse men was excedynge wroth and sent forth and slue all the chyldren that were in bethleem and in all the coastes there of as many as were two yere olde and vnder accordynge to the tyme which he then was yt fulfilled which was spoken by ye prophet ieremy sayinge.
 on ye hilles was a voyce herde greate mournynge wepynge lamentacion.
 rachel wepynge for her chyldren and wolde not be conforted because they were not.
 when herode was deed.
 beholde an angell of the lorde appered in a dreame to ioseph in egypte sayinge.
 arise and take the chylde and his mother go into ye londe of israel.
 for they are deed which sought the chyldes life.
 and he arose vp and toke ye chylde and his mother came into the londe of israel.
 but whe he herde that archelaus did raygne in iury in ye rowme of his father herode he was afrayde to go thither.
 notwithstondinge after he was warned of god in a dreame he turned asyde into the parties of galile and went and dwelt in a cite called nazareth to fulfill yt which was spoken by the prophetes.
 he shalbe called a nazarite.
 in those dayes ihon the baptyst came and preached in the wildernes of iury saynge.
 amede youre selues the kyngdome of heuen is at honde.
 this is he of whom it is spoke by ye prophet esay which sayeth.
 the voyce of a cryer in ye wyldernes prepare the lordes waye and make his pathes straight.
 this ihon had his garment of camels heer and a lethre gerdell aboute his loynes.
 hys meate was locustes and wylde hony.
 then went out to hym ierusalem and all iury and all the region rounde aboute iordan and were baptised of him in iordan cofessynge their synnes.
 now when he sawe many of the pharises and of ye saduces come to hys baptim he sayde vnto them.
 ye generacio of vipers who hath certified you that ye shal escape ye vengeaunce to come.
 bewarre brynge forth due frutes of pennaunce.
 thinke not now to saye in your selues we haue abraham to oure father.
 for i saye vnto you that god is able of these stones to rayse vp chyldren vnto abraham.
 euen now is the axe put vnto ye rote of the trees.
 therfore euery tre which bringeth not forth good frute shalbe hewe downe and cast into the fyre.
 i baptise you with water to repentaunce.
 but he that cometh after me is myghtier the i whose shues i am not worthy to beare.
 he shall baptise you with ye holy goost wt fyre.
 which hath also his fan in his hond and will pourge his floore and gadre the wheet into his garner will burne ye chaffe with vnquencheable fyre.
 then came iesus from galile to iordan vnto ihon to be baptised of hym.
 but iho forbade hym saynge.
 i haue nede to be baptysed of the.
 and commest thou to me.
 iesus answered sayd vnto hym.
 let it be so now.
 for thus it be commeth vs to fulfyll all righteousnes.
 then he suffred hym.
 and iesus assone as he was baptised came straight out of the water.
 and lo heue was ope ouer hym.
 and ihon sawe the spirite of god descende lyke a doue and lyght vpon hym.
 and lo there came a voyce fro heue sayng.
 thys ys that my beloued sonne in whom is my delyte.
 then was iesus ledd awaye of the spirite in to wildernes to be tempted of the deuyll.
 and when he had fasted fourtye dayes and fourtye nightes he was afterward an hungred.
 and the tepter came to him and sayde.
 yf thou be the sonne of god commaunde that these stones be made breed.
 he answered sayde.
 yt is wrytte.
 man shall not lyue by bred onlye but by euery worde that proceadeth out of the mouth of god.
 then the deuyll toke hym vp into the holy cite and set hym on a pynacle of the temple and sayde vnto hym.
 yf thou be ye sonne of god cast thy sylfe downe.
 for it is wrytten.
 he shall geue his angels charge ouer the and with their handes they shal holde the vp that thou dashe not thy fote agaynst a stone.
 and iesus sayde vnto hym.
 it ys wrytten also.
 thou shalt not tempte thy lorde god.
 agayne the deuyll toke hym vp and led hym into an excedynge hye mountayne and shewed hym all the kyngdomes of the worlde and all the glorie of them and sayde vnto hym.
 all these wil i geue the yf thou wilt fall downe and worship me.
 then sayde iesus vnto hym.
 auoyde sata.
 for it ys wrytte.
 thou shalt worshyp the lorde thy god and hym onely shalt thou serue.
 then the deuell left hym and beholde the angels came and ministred vnto hym.
 when iesus had herde that ihon was taken he departed into galile and left nazareth and went and dwelt in capernaum which is a cite apon the see in the coostes of zabulon and neptalim yt the thinge might be fulfilled whiche was spoken by esay the prophet sayinge.
 the londe of zabulon and neptalim the waye of the see beyonde iordan and galile of the gentyls the people which sat in darknes sawe a greate lyght to them which sat in the region shadowe of deeth lyght is begone to shyne.
 from that tyme forth beganne iesus to preach and to saye.
 amende youre selues ye kingdome of heauen is at honde.
 as iesus walked by the see of galile he sawe two brethren.
 simon which was called peter andrew his brother castynge a net into ye see for they were fisshers and he sayde vnto them.
 folowe me i will make you fisshers of me.
 and they strayght waye lefte their nettes and folowed hym.
 and whan he wet forth from thence he sawe other two brethren iames the sonne of zebede and ihon his brother in the ship with zebede their father mendynge their nettes and called them.
 and they without tarynge lefte ye shyp and their father and folowed hym.
 and iesus went aboute all galile teachyng in their synagoges and preachynge the gospel of the kyngdome and healed all maner of siknes all maner dyseases amonge the people.
 and his fame spred abrode through out all siria.
 and they brought vnto hym all sick people that were taken with diuers diseases and gripinges and the yt were possessed with deuils those which were lunatyke and those that had the palsie.
 he heal and ther folowed hym a greate nombre of people from galile from the ten cities and from ierusalem and from the regions that lye beyonde iordan.
 when he sawe the people he went vp into a mountayne.
 and when he was set his disciples came to hym and he opened his mouth and taught them sayinge.
 blessed are the poore in sprete.
 for theirs is the kyngdome of heue.
 blessed are they that mourne.
 for they shalbe coforted.
 blessed are the meke.
 for they shall inheret the erth.
 blessed are they which honger thyrst for rightewesnes.
 for they shalbe filled.
 blessed are the mercifull.
 for they shall obteyne mercy.
 blessed are the pure in herte.
 for they shall se god.
 blessed are the peacemakers.
 for they shalbe called the chyldren of god.
 blessed are they which suffre persecucion for rightwesnes sake.
 for theirs is the kyngdome of heuen.
 blessed are ye when men reuyle you and persecute you and falsly say all manner of yuell saynges against you for my sake.
 reioyce and be glad for greate is youre rewarde in heue.
 for so persecuted they the prophetes which were before youre dayes.
 ye are ye salt of the earth but and yf the salt haue lost his saltnes what can be salted therwith.
 it is thence forth good for nothynge but to be cast out and to be trodden vnder fote of men.
 ye are the light of the worlde.
 a cite that is set on an hill can not be hid.
 nether do men lyght a candell and put it vnder a busshell but on a candelstick and it lighteth all that are in the house.
 let youre light so shyne before men that they maye se youre good workes and glorify youre father which is in heauen.
 thinke not that i am come to destroye the lawe or the prophetes.
 no i am not come to destroye them but to fulfyll them.
 for truly i saye vnto you.
 till heauen and earth perisshe one iott or one tyttle of the lawe shall not escape tyll all be fulfilled.
 whosoeuer breaketh one of these least comaundmentes and teacheth me so he shalbe called the leest in the kyngdome of heauen but whosoeuer obserueth and teacheth the same shalbe called greate in the kyngdome of heauen.
 for i saye vnto you.
 excepte youre rightewesnes exceade the righetewesnes of the scribes and pharises ye can not entre in to the kyngdome of heauen.
 ye haue herde how it was sayde to the of the olde tyme.
 thou shalt not kyll.
 for whosoeuer kylleth shall be in daunger of iudgement.
 but i saye vnto you.
 whosoeuer is angrie with his brother is in daunger of the iudgement.
 whosoeuer sayeth vnto his brother.
 racha is in daunger of ye cousell.
 but whosoeuer sayeth.
 thou foole is in daunger of hell fyre.
 therfore when thou offrest thy gift at the altare and there remembrest that thy brother hath ought agaynst the.
 leaue there thyne offrynge before the altare and go thy waye first and reconcyle thy selfe to thy brother then come and offre thy gyfte.
 agre with thine aduersary quicklye whyle thou art in the waye with hym lest that aduersary deliuer the to the iudge and the iudge deliuer the to the minister and then thou be cast in to preson.
 i saye vnto the verely.
 thou shalt not come out thece till thou haue payed the vtmost farthinge.
 ye haue herde how it was sayde to them of olde tyme.
 thou shalt not committe aduoutrie.
 but i saye vnto you that whosoeuer loketh on a wife lustinge after her hath committed aduoutrie with hir already in his hert.
 wherfore yf thy right eye offende the plucke hym out and cast him from the.
 better it is for the that one of thy membres perisshe then that thy whole body shulde be cast in to hell.
 also yf thy right honde offende the cut hym of and cast him from the.
 better yt is that one of thy mebres perissh the yt all yi body shulde be cast in to hell.
 it is sayde.
 whosoeuer putteth awaye his wyfe let hym geue her a testimony all of the deuorcemet.
 but i saye vnto you.
 whosoeuer putteth awaye his wyfe except it be for fornicacio causeth her to breake matrymony.
 and whosoeuer maryeth her that is deuorsed breaketh wedlocke.
 agayne ye haue herde how it was sayde to the of olde tyme.
 thou shalt not forsweare thy selfe but shalt performe thyne ooth to god.
 but i saye vnto you.
 sweare not at all nether by heaue for it is godis seate.
 nor yet by the earth for it is his fote stole.
 nether by ierusalem for it is the cyte of ye greate kinge.
 nether shalt thou sweare by thy heed because thou canst not make one heer whyte or blacke.
 but your communicacion shalbe yee yee.
 nay nay.
 for what soeuer is more then that commeth of euel.
 ye haue herde howe it is sayde.
 an eye for an eye a toth for a toth.
 but i saye vnto you.
 that ye resist not euell.
 but whosoeuer geueth the a blowe on thy right cheke turne to him the other also.
 and yf eny man will sue the at the lawe take awaye thy coate let him haue thy cloake also.
 and who so compelleth the to go a myle go wt hym twayne.
 geue to hym that axeth.
 and from hym that wolde borowe turne not awaye.
 ye haue herde how it is saide.
 thou shalt loue thyne neghboure hate thyne enemy.
 but i saye vnto you.
 loue youre enemies.
 blesse the that cursse you.
 do good to the that hate you.
 praye for the which do you wronge and persecute you that ye maye be the chyldern of youre father which is in heauen.
 for he maketh his sonne to aryse on the euel and on the good and sendeth his rayne on the iust and vniuste.
 for yf ye loue them which loue you what rewarde shall ye haue.
 do not the publicans eue so.
 and yf ye be frendly to youre brethren onlye.
 what singuler thynge do ye.
 do not the publicans also lyke wyse.
 ye shall therfore be perfecte euen as youre father in heaue is perfecte.
 take hede to youre almes that ye geue it not in the syght of men to the intent that ye wolde be sene of them.
 or els ye get no rewarde of youre father which is in heauen.
 when soeuer therfore thou geuest thine almes thou shalt not make a trompet to be blowen before the as the ypocrites do in the synagoges and in the stretes for to be praysed of me.
 verely i saye vnto you.
 they haue their rewarde.
 but whe thou doest almes let not thy lefte hande knowe what thy righte hande doth.
 that thine almes maye be secrete.
 and thy father which seith in secrete shall rewarde the openly.
 and when thou prayest thou shalt not be as ye ypocrytes are.
 for they loue to stode and praye in the synagoges and in the corners of the stretes to be sene of men.
 verely i saie vnto you.
 they haue their rewarde.
 but when thou prayest entre in to thy chamber and shut thy dore to the praye to thy father which is in secrete.
 and thy father which seith in secrete shall rewarde the openly.
 and when ye praye bable not moch as ye hethen do.
 for they thinke that they shalbe herde for their moch bablynges sake.
 be not ye lyke them therfore.
 for youre father knoweth where of ye haue nede before ye axe of him.
 after thys maner therfore shall ye praye.
 o oure father which art in heauen halowed be thy name.
 thy kyngdome come.
 thy wyll be fulfilled vpon earth as it is in heauen.
 geue vs this daye oure dayly bred.
 and forgeue vs oure dettes as we also forgeue oure detters.
 and lede vs not in to teptacion.
 but delyuer vs from euell.
 for thyne is the kyngdome and the power and the glorye for euer.
 amen.
 for yf ye forgeue other men their treaspases youre heauenly father shall also forgeue you.
 but and ye wyll not forgeue me their trespases nomore shall youre father forgeue you youre trespases.
 moreouer when ye fast be not sad as ye ypocrytes are.
 for they disfigure their faces that they myght be sene of men to fast.
 verely i saye vnto you.
 they haue their rewarde.
 but thou whe thou fastest annoynte thyne heed and wash thy face that it appeare not vnto men that thou fastest.
 but vnto thy father which is in secrete.
 and thy father which seyth in secrete shal rewarde the openly.
 se that ye gather you not treasure vpon the earth where rust and mothes corrupte and where theues breake through and steale.
 but gather you treasure together in heauen where nether rust nor mothes corrupte and where theues nether breake vp nor yet steale.
 for where youre treasure is there is youre herte also.
 the eye is the light of the body.
 yf thyne eye then be syngle all thy body shalbe ful of light.
 but and yf thyne eye be wycked all thy body shalbe full of darckenes.
 wherfore yf the light that is in the be darckenes how greate then shall that darckenes be.
 no ma can serue two masters.
 for ether he shall hate the one and loue the other.
 or els he shall leane to the one and despise the other.
 ye can not serue god and mammon.
 therfore i saye vnto you.
 be not ye carefull for your lyfe what ye shall eate or what ye shall drinke.
 nor yet for youre body what ye shal put on.
 ys not the lyfe more worth the meate and the body more of value then raymet.
 beholde the foules of ye ayer.
 for they sowe not nether reepe nor yet cary in to the barnes.
 and yet youre heauely father fedeth the.
 are ye not moch better the they.
 which of you though he toke thought therfore coulde put one cubit vnto his stature.
 why care ye then for rayment.
 considre the lylies of the felde how they growe.
 they laboure not nether spynne.
 and yet for all that i saye vnto you that euen salomon in all his royalte was not arayed lyke vnto one of these.
 wherfore yf god so cloth the grasse which is to daye in the felde and to morowe shalbe cast into the fornace.
 shal he not moch more do the same vnto you o ye of lytle fayth.
 therfore take no thought sayinge.
 what shall we eate or what shall we drinke.
 or where with shall we be clothed.
 after all soch thynges do the heithen seke.
 for youre heauenly father knoweth that ye haue nede of all these thynges.
 seke ye fyrst the kyngdome of heauen and the righteousnes therof so shal all these thynges be ministred vnto you.
 care not then for the morow for the morow shall care for it self.
 euery daye hath ynough of his owne trauayll.
 ivdge not that ye be not iudged.
 for as ye iudge so shal ye be iudged.
 and with what measure ye meete with the same shall it be measured to you agayne.
 why seist thou a moate in thy brothers eye and perceauest not the beame yt is yn thine awne eye.
 or why saiest thou to yi brother.
 holde i wil plucke the moate out of thyne eye and beholde a beame is in thyne awne eye.
 ypocryte fyrst cast out the beame out of thyne awne eye and then shalt thou se clearly to plucke out the moate out of thy brothers eye.
 geue not that which is holy to dogges.
 nether cast ye youre pearles before swyne lest they treade them vnder their fete the other turne agayne and all to rente you.
 axe and it shalbe geuen you.
 seke and ye shall fynde.
 knocke and it shalbe opened vnto you.
 for whosoeuer axeth receaueth.
 and he that seketh fyndeth.
 and to hym yt knocketh it shal opened.
 ys there eny man amonge you which yf his sonne axed hym bred wolde offer him a stone.
 or yf he axed fysshe wolde he proffer hym a serpent.
 yf ye then which are euell can geue youre chyldren good gyftes.
 how moche more shall youre father which is in heauen geue good thynges to them that axe hym.
 therfore what soeuer ye wolde that me shulde do to you eue so do ye to them.
 this ys the lawe and the prophetes.
 enter in at the strayte gate.
 for wyde is the gate and broade is the waye that leadeth to destruccion.
 many there be which go in therat.
 but strayte is the gate and narowe ys the waye which leadeth vnto lyfe and fewe there be that fynde it.
 beware of false prophetes which come to you in shepes clothinge but inwardly they are rauenynge wolues ye shall knowe them by their frutes.
 do men gather grapes of thornes.
 or figges of thistles.
 euen so euery good tree bryngeth forth good frute.
 but a corrupte tree bryngeth forth euyl frute a good tree can not bryng forth bad frute.
 nother can a rotten tre bringe forth good frute.
 euery tre that bryngeth not forth good frute shalbe hewen downe and cast into the fyre.
 wherfore by their frutes ye shall knowe them.
 not all they that saye vnto me lorde lorde shall enter in to the kyngdome of heauen.
 but he that doth the will of my father which ys in heauen.
 many shall saye to me in that daye.
 lorde lorde.
 haue we not prophecied in thy name.
 haue we not cast out deuyls in thy name.
 haue we not done many greate dedes in thy name.
 and then will i knowlege vnto them.
 i neuer knewe you departe fro me ye workers of iniquite.
 whosoeuer therfore heareth of me these sayinges and doeth the same i wyll lycke hym vnto a wyse man which buylt hys house vpon a rocke.
 now whan abundaunce of rayne descended and the wyndes blewe and bet vpon that same house it fel not because it was grounded on the rocke.
 and who soeuer heareth of me these sayinges doth the not shalbe lyckened vnto a folysh ma which buylt his housse apon the sonde.
 now whan abudaunce of rayne desceded the wyndes blewe bet vpon yt housse it fell and great was the fall of it.
 and it came to passe that when iesus had ended these saynges the people were astonnyed at hys doctryne.
 for he taught them as one hauynge power and not as the scribes.
 when he was come downe from the mountayne moch people folowed him.
 and lo there came a leper and worsheped him sayinge.
 lorde yf thou wylt thou canst make me cleane.
 and iesus put forth hys honde touched him sayinge.
 i wyl be thou cleane.
 immediatly his leprosie was clensed.
 and iesus sayde vnto hym.
 se thou tell no ma but go and shew thy selfe to the preste and offer the gyfte that moses comaunded in witnes to them.
 when iesus was entred into capernaum there came vnto him a captayne besought hym sayinge.
 syr my seruaunt lyeth sicke at home of the palsye and ys greuously payned.
 iesus sayd vnto hym.
 i wil come heale him.
 the captayne answered and sayde.
 syr i am nor worthy that thou shuldest come vnder my rofe but speake the worde only and my seruaunt shalbe healed.
 for i myselfe also am a ma subiect to ye auctorite of another haue sowdiers vnder me.
 yet wha i saye to one.
 go he goeth and to another.
 come he commeth.
 to my seruaunt.
 do this he doeth it.
 when iesus hearde that he marueled and sayde to them that folowed hym.
 verely i say vnto you.
 i haue not founde so greate fayth.
 no not i israel.
 but i say vnto you.
 many shall come from the east and west and shall rest with abraham isaac and iacob in the kyngdome of heauen.
 and the chyldren of the kyngdome shalbe cast out in to vtter darcknes.
 there shalbe wepinge gnasshing of teth.
 and iesus sayd vnto ye captayne.
 go thy waye and as thou beleuest so be it vnto the.
 and his seruaunt was healed the same houre.
 and iesus went in to peters housse and sawe hys wyues mother lyinge sicke of a feuer.
 so he touched her hande and the feuer left hir.
 and she arose and ministred vnto them.
 when the euen was come they brought vnto him many that were possessed with deuylls.
 and he cast out ye spirites with a worde healed all that were sicke that ye thinge might be fulfilled which was spoken by esay the prophet sayinge.
 he toke on him oure infirmities and bare oure sickneses.
 whe iesus sawe moch people about him he commaunded to go ouer the water.
 and there came a scribe and sayde vnto hym.
 master i wyll folowe the whyther so euer thou goest.
 and iesus sayde vnto him.
 the foxes haue holes and the byrddes of the ayer hane nestes but ye sonne of ma hath not wheron to rest his heede.
 another that was one of his disciples sayde vnto hym.
 syr geue me leue fyrst to go burye my father.
 but iesus sayde vnto him.
 folowe thou me and let the deed burie their deed.
 and he entred in to a shyppe his disciples folowed him.
 and beholde there arose a greate tempest in the see in so moch that the shippe was couered with wawes he was a slepe.
 and his disciples came vnto him and awoke hym sayinge.
 lorde saue vs we perishe.
 and he sayde vnto them.
 why are ye fearfull o ye of lytell faithe.
 then he arose and rebuked the wyndes and the see there folowed a greate calme.
 and the men marueyled and sayde.
 what ma is this that both wyndes and see obey hym.
 and when he was come to ye other syde in to the countre of the gergesites there met him two possessed of deuyls which came out of the graues and were out of measure fearce so that no man myght go by that waye.
 and beholde they cryed out sayinge.
 oh iesu thou sonne of god what haue we to do wt the.
 art thou come hyther to tormet vs before the tyme be come.
 and there was a good waye of from them a greate heerd of swyne fedinge.
 then the deuyles besought him sayinge.
 yf thou cast vs out suffre vs to go oure waye in to the heerd of swyne.
 and he sayde vnto them.
 go youre wayes.
 then went they out and departed in to the heerd of swyne.
 and beholde ye whoale heerd of swyne was caryed with violece headlinge in to the see and perished in the water.
 the the heerdmen fled and wente their ways in to the cyte and tolde euery thinge what had fortuned vnto the possessed of the deuyls.
 and beholde all the cyte came out and met iesus.
 and when they sawe hym they besought hym for to departe out of their coostes.
 then entred he into a shipp and passed ouer and came into his awne cite.
 and lo they brought vnto him a man sicke of ye palsie lyinge in his bed.
 and when iesus sawe the faith of the he sayde to the sicke of ye palsie.
 my sonne be of good cheare thy sinnes are forgeue the.
 and beholde certeyne of the scribes sayde in them selues.
 this man blasphemeth.
 but when iesus sawe their thoughtes he sayde.
 wherfore thinke ye euill in youre hertes.
.
 whether ys it easier to saye.
 thy synnes be forgeue ye or to saie.
 arise and walke.
 but that ye maye knowe that the sonne of man hath power to forgeue sinnes in earth the sayde he vnto the sicke of ye palsye.
 arise take vp thy bed and go home.
 and he arose and wente home.
 hen ye people sawe it they marueyled glorified god which had geue soch power vnto men.
 and as iesus passed forth from thence he sawe a man syt a receyuinge of custome named mathew sayde vnto him.
 folowe me.
 and he arose and folowed him.
 and it came to passe as he sat at meate in the house.
 beholde many publicans and synners came and sat downe also with iesus and hys disciples.
 when the pharises sawe that they sayde to hys disciples.
 why eateth youre master with publicans and synners.
 when iesus herde that he sayde vnto them.
 the whole nede not ye phisicio but they that are sicke.
 go and learne what that meaneth.
 i haue pleasure in mercy and not in offerynge.
 for i am not come to call the righteous but ye synners to repentaunce then came the disciples of ihon to hym sayinge.
 why do we ye pharises fast so oft.
 and thy disciples fast not.
 and iesus sayde vnto the.
 can the weddynge chyldre mourne as loge as the bridegrome is with them.
 the tyme will come when the bridegrome shalbe taken from them and the shall they fast.
 no man peceth an olde garment with a pece of newe clothe.
 for then taketh he awaye the pece agayne from the garment the rent ys made greater.
 nether do men put new wyne in to olde vessels for then the vessels breake and the wyne runneth out ye vessels peryshe but they poure newe wyne in to newe vessels and so are both saued together whyle he thus spake vnto them beholde there came a certayne ruler and worshipped him sayinge.
 my doughter is eue now deceased but come and lay yi honde on her and she shall liue.
 iesus arose and folowed hym with hys disciples.
 and beholde a woman which was diseased wt an yssue of bloude xij.
 yeres came behynde hym and touched the hem of hys vesture.
 for she sayde in her silfe.
 yf i maye touche but euen his vesture only i shalbe safe.
 then iesus tourned him aboute and behelde her sayinge.
 doughter be of good conforte thy faith hath made ye safe.
 and she was made whole euen that same houre.
 and when iesus came into the rulers house and sawe the minstrels and the people raginge he sayde vnto them.
 get you hece for ye mayde is not deed but slepeth.
 and they laughed hym to scorne.
 but whan the people were put forth he went in and toke her by the honde and the mayde arose.
 and this was noysed through out all that londe.
 and as iesus departed thence two blynde me folowed hym cryinge and sayinge.
 o thou sonne of dauid haue mercy vpon vs.
 and when he was come home the blynde came to hym and iesus sayde vnto them beleue ye that i am able to do thys.
 and they sayde vnto hym.
 yee lorde.
 then touched he their eyes sayinge.
 acordinge to youre fayth be it vnto you.
 and their eyes were opened.
 and iesus charged the sayinge.
 se that no ma knowe of it.
 but they departed spred abroade his name through out all the londe.
 whan these were gone out beholde they brought to hym a domme man possessed of a deuyll.
 and whan the deuyl was cast out the domme spake.
 and the people merueled sayinge.
 it was neuer so sene in israel.
 but ye pharises sayde.
 he casteth out deuyls thorow the chefe deuyll.
 and iesus wente aboute in all cities and townes teachinge in their synagoges preachyng ye gospel of ye kyngdome healinge all maner sicknes all maner desease amoge the people.
 and when he sawe the people he had compassion on the because they were pyned awaye and scattered abroade euen as shepe hauinge no shepherd then sayde he to hys disciples.
 ye heruest is greate but ye laborers are fewe.
 wherfore praye the lorde of the haruest to sende forth laborers into hys haruest.
 and he called his disciples vnto hym gaue them power ouer vncleane spretes to cast them out to heale all maner of sicknesses and all maner of deseases.
 the names of the apostels are these.
 the fyrst simon called peter.
 andrew his brother iames the sonne of zebede and ihon his brother.
 philip and bartlemew.
 thomas and mathew the publican.
 iames the sonne of alphe and lebbeus otherwyse called taddeus.
 simon of cane and iudas iscarioth which also betrayed hym.
 these twolue sent iesus and commaunded them sayinge.
 go not in to the wayes yt leade to the heithen and in to the cities of the samaritas enter ye not.
 but go rather to the lost shepe of the housse of israel.
 go and preach sayinge.
 the kyngdome of heue is at hande.
 heale the sicke clense the lepers rayse the deed cast out the deuils.
 frely ye haue receaued frely geue againe.
 posses not golde nor siluer nor brasse yn youre gerdels nor yet scrip towardes your iorney.
 nether two cotes nether shues nor yet a staffe.
 for the workman is worthy of his meate.
 in to whatsoeuer cite or towne ye shall come enquyre in it who is mete for you and there abyde tyll ye go thence.
 and whe ye come in to an house salute ye same.
 and yf the housse be mete for you yor peace shal come vpo it.
 but yf it be not mete for you yor peace shal turne to you againe.
 and yf no man wil receaue you ner heare youre preachinge departe out of that house or that cite and shake the dust of youre fete.
 truly i saye vnto you.
 it shall be easyer for ye londe of sodoma and gomorra in ye daye of iudgment then for that cite.
 beholde i sende you forth as shepe amoge wolues.
 be ye therfore wyse as serpentes and innocent as doues.
 beware of men for they shall deliuer you vp to the cousels and shal scourge you in their synagoges.
 and ye shall be brought before prynces and kynges for my sake in witnes to them and to the gentyls.
 but when they delyuer you vp take no thought how or what ye shall speake for yt shalbe geuen you euen in that same houre what ye shall saye.
 for it is not ye that speake but the sprete of your father which speaketh in you.
 the brother shall delyuer the brother to deeth and the father the sonne.
 and the chyldren shall aryse agaynst their fathers mothers shall helpe them to deeth.
 ye shall be hated of all men for my names sake.
 but he yt endureth to the ende shalbe saued.
 when they persecute you in one cite flye in to another.
 i tell you for a treuth ye shall not fynysshe all the cities of israel tyll the sonne of man come.
 the disciple is not aboue the master nether the seruaunt aboue the lorde.
 it is ynough for the disciple to be as his master and the seruaunt as his lorde.
 yf they haue called the good ma of the house beelzebub how moch more shal they call them of his housholde so.
 feare them not therfore.
 there is nothinge hyd that shal not be openly shewed.
 and nothinge secrete that shall not be knowne.
 what i tell you in darcknes that speake ye in light.
 and what ye heare in the eare that preach ye vpon the house toppes.
 and feare ye not them that kyll the body and be not able to kyll the soule.
 but rather feare hi which is able to destroye both soule and body in to hell.
 are not two sparowes solde for a farthinge.
 yet doth there none of the light vpon the groude without youre father.
 and now are all ye hayres of youre heade tolde.
 feare ye not therfore.
 ye are of more value then many sparowes.
 therfore whosoeuer knowlegeth me before me him wil i knowlege also before my father which is in heauen.
 but who soeuer denyeth me before me him wil i also denie before my father which is in heauen.
 thynke not that i am come to sende peace vpon earth.
 i came not to sende peace but a swerde.
 for i am come to set a ma at variaunce ageynst his father and the doughter ageynst hir mother the doughter in lawe ageynst her mother in lawe.
 and a mans foes shalbe they of his owne housholde.
 who so loueth father and mother more then me is not mete for me.
 and he that loueth sonne or doughter more then me is not mete for me.
 and he yt taketh not his crosse and foloweth me is not mete for me.
 who so fyndeth his life shal lose it.
 and he that loseth his life for my sake shal fynde it.
 he that receaueth you receaueth me.
 who so receaueth me receaueth him yt sent me.
 he that receaueth a prophet in the name of a prophet shal receaue a prophetes rewarde.
 he yt receaueth a righteous man in the name of a righteous man shal receane a righteous mans rewarde.
 and who soeuer geueth vnto one of the least of these a cupp of colde water onely to drinke in ye name of a disciple verely i saie vnto you.
 he shal not lose his rewarde.
 and it came to passe wha iesus had made an ende of comaundinge his twolue disciples he departed thence.
 to teach and to preach in their cities.
 whan ihon beinge in preson herde of the workes of christ he sent two of his disciples and sayde vnto him.
 art thou he yt shal come or shal we loke for another.
 iesus answered and sayde vnto the.
 go youre waye and tell ihon agayne what ye se and heare.
 the blynde se and the lame go.
 the lepers are clensed and ye deaf heare.
 the deed aryse ageyne and the gospell is preached to the poore.
 and blessed is he that is not offended at me.
 whan they wente their waye iesus beganne to speake vnto the people concernynge ihon.
 what are ye gone out for to se in the wyldernes.
 wolde ye se a rede shaken with the wynde.
 or what are ye gone out for to se.
 wolde ye se a man clothed in soft rayment.
 beholde they that weare soft clothinge are in kinges houses but what are ye gone out for to se.
 a prophet.
 yee i saye vnto you and more the a prophet.
 for this is he of who it is written.
 beholde i sende my messauger before thy face which shal prepare thy waye before the.
 verely i saye vnto you.
 amonge ye children of wemen arose there not a greater then ihon the baptist.
 not withstondinge he that is lesse in the kyngdome of heauen is greater then he.
 from the tyme of ihon baptist hither to ye kyngdome of heauen suffreth violence and the violent plucke it vnto them.
 for all the prophetes and the lawe prophecied vnto ihon.
 also yf ye wil receaue it this is helias which shulde come.
 who so hath eares to heare let hi heare.
 but where vnto shal i licke this generacion.
 it is like vnto childre which syt in the market and call vnto their felowes saye.
 we haue pyped vnto you and ye wolde not daunse.
 we haue morned vnto you ye wolde not wepe.
 for ihon came nether eatinge nor drynkinge they saye.
 he hath the deuyll.
 the sonne of man came eatinge and drynkinge they saye.
 lo what a glutton and wyne bebber this ma is and a companyon of publicans synners.
 and wissdome is iustified of hir children.
 then beganne he to vpbrade the cities in the which most of his miracles were done because they amended not.
 wo vnto the chorasin wo vnto the bethsaida.
 for yf the miracles which haue bene shewed amoge you had bene done in tyre and sidon they had repented longe agoo in sack cloth and asshes.
 neuertheles i saye vnto you.
 it shalbe easyer for tyre and sidon in the daye of iudgment then for you.
 and thou capernaum which art lift vp vnto heauen shalt be brought downe vnto hel.
 for yf the miracles which haue bene done in the had bene shewed in sodom they had remained vnto this daye.
 neuertheles i saye vnto you.
 it shalbe easyer for the londe of sodome in the daye of iudgment the for the.
 at ye same tyme iesus answered and sayde.
 i prayse the o father and lorde of heauen and earth that thou hast hid these thinges from the wyse and prudent and opened the vnto babes.
 euen so father for so it pleased the.
 all thinges are geuen ouer vnto me of my father.
 and no ma knoweth the sonne but the father.
 nether knoweth eny man the father saue the sonne and he to whom the sonne wil open it.
 come vnto me all ye that laboure and are laden and i wil ease you.
 take my yock vpon you and lerne of me for i am meke and lowlye of hert ye shal fynde rest vnto youre soules.
 for my yock is easy and my burden is light.
 at the same tyme wete iesus thorow the corne vpon the sabbath and his disciples were hongrie and beganne to plucke of the eares of the corne and to eate.
 when ye pharises sawe that they sayde vnto him.
 beholde thy disciples do that which is not laufull to do vpon the sabbath.
 he sayde vnto them.
 haue ye not red what dauid did whan he was hongrie they also yt were with him.
 how he entred in to the house of god ate the shew breds which were not laufull for him to eate nether for the yt were with him but onely for the prestes.
 or haue ye not red in the lawe how that the prestes in the temple breake the sabbath and yet are blamelesse.
 but i saye vnto you.
 yt here is one greater then the temple.
 but yf ye wyst what this were i haue pleasure in mercy and not in offeringe ye wolde not haue condemned innocentes.
 for the sonne of man is lorde euen ouer the sabbath.
 and he departed thence and wente in to their synagoge.
 and beholde there was a ma which had his hade dryed vp.
 and they axed him sayenge.
 is it laufull to heale vpon the sabbath.
 because they might accuse him.
 but he sayde vnto the.
 which of you is it yf he had a shepe falle in to a pytte vpon the sabbath that wolde not take him and lift him out.
 and how moch is a man better then a shepe.
 therfore it is lefull to do good vpon the sabbath.
 then sayde he to the ma.
 stretch forth thine hande.
 and he stretched it forth.
 and it was whole agayne like vnto the other.
 then wente the pharises out and helde a councell agaynst him how they might destroye him.
 but wha iesus knew therof he departed thence moch people folowed him.
 and he healed them all and charged them yt they shulde not make him knowne.
 that the thinge might be fulfylled which was spoken by esay the prophet which sayeth.
 beholde this is my seruaunt whom i haue chosen.
 and my beloued in whom my soule delyteth.
 i wil put my sprete vpon hi and he shal shewe iudgment vnto the heithe.
 he shal not stryue ner crye nether shal eny man heare his voyce in the stretes.
 a brosed rede shal he not breake and flax that beginneth to burne shal he not quench tyll he sende forth iudgment vnto victory.
 and in his name shal the heithen trust.
 then was there brought vnto him one possessed of a deuell the which was blynde and domne and he healed him.
 in so moch yt ye blynde and domne both spake and sawe.
 and all the people were amased and sayde.
 is not this the sonne of dauid.
 but whan the pharises herde that they sayde.
 he dryueth the deuyls out none other wyse but thorow beelzebub the chefe of the deuyls.
 neuertheles iesus knew their thoughtes and sayde vnto them.
 euery kyngdome deuyded within it self shalbe desolate.
 and euery cite or house deuyded in it self maye not contynue.
 so yf one sathan cast out another the is he at variaunce within him self.
 how maye then his kyngdome endure.
 but yf i cast out deuils thorow beelzebub thorow whom do youre childre cast them out.
 therfore shal they be youre iudges.
 but yf i cast out the deuyls by the sprete of god then is the kyngdome of god come vpon you.
 or how ca a man entre in to a stronge mans house and violently take awaye his goodes excepte he first bynde the stronge ma the spoyle his house.
 he that is not wt me is agaynst me.
 he yt gathereth not wt me scatereth abrode.
 therfore i saye vnto you.
 all synne and blasphemy shalbe forgeuen vnto men but the blasphemy agaynst the sprete shal not be forgeuen vnto men.
 and whosoeuer speaketh a worde agaynst the sonne of man it shalbe forgeue him.
 but whosoeuer speaketh agaynst the holy goost it shal not be forgeuen him nether in this worlde ner in the worlde to come.
 either make the tre good and his frute good also or els make the tre euel his frute euel also.
 for the tre is knowne by the frute.
 o ye generacio of vypers how can ye speake good whan ye youre selues are euell.
 for of ye abundace of ye hert ye mouth speaketh.
 a good man out of the good treasure of his hert bringeth forth good thinges.
 an euel man out of his euell treasure bringeth forth euell thinges.
 but i saye vnto you that of euery ydell worde that me haue spoken they shal geue accomptes at ye daye of iudgmet.
 out of thy wordes thou shalt be iustified out of thy wordes thou shalt be codemned.
 then answered certayne of the scrybes and pharises and sayde.
 master we wolde fayne se a toke of the.
 and he answered and saide vnto the.
 this euell and aduouterous generacion seketh a token.
 and there shal no token be geuen the but the token of the prophete ionas.
 for as ionas was thre dayes and thre nightes in the whalles bely so shal the sonne of ma be thre dayes and thre nightes in the hert of the earth.
 the men of ninyue shal ryse in the last iudgment with this generacion and shal condemne it.
 for they dyd penaunce acordinge to ye preachinge of ionas.
 and beholde here is one greater the ionas.
 the quene of the south shal aryse in the last iudgmet with this generacion and shal condene it.
 for she came from the vttemost partes of the earth to heare ye wyssdome of salomon.
 and lo here is one greater then salomon.
 whan the vncleane sprete is gone out of man he walketh thorow dry places sekinge rest fyndeth none.
 the saieth he.
 i wil turne agayne in to my house fro whence i wete out.
 and whan he cometh he fyndeth it emptye swepte and garnyshed.
 then goeth he his waye taketh vnto him seuen other spretes worse then him self.
 and whan they are entred in they dwell there.
 and the ende of that man is worse then the begynnynge.
 euen so shal it go wt this euell generacion.
 whyle he yet talked vnto the people beholde his mother his brethre stode without desyringe to speake wt him.
 then sayde one vnto him.
 beholde thy mother and thy brethren stonde without wolde speake wt the.
 neuertheles he answered sayde vnto him that tolde him.
 who is my mother.
 who are my brethren.
 and he stretched forth his hande ouer his disciples sayde.
 beholde my mother and my brethre.
 for who soeuer doth ye wyll of my father which is in heaue the same is my brother sister and mother.
 the same daye wente iesus out of ye house and sat by the see syde moch people resorted vnto him.
 so yt he wete in to a shyppe and satt him downe and all the people stode vpo the shore.
 and he spake many thinges vnto the in symilitudes sayenge.
 beholde the sower wente forth to sowe.
 and as he sowed some fell by the waye syde.
 then came the foules ate it vp.
 some fell vpon stony grounde anone it spronge vp because it had no depth of earth.
 but whan the sonne arose it caught heate.
 and for so moch as it had no rote it withred awaye.
 some fell amoge the thornes the thornes grewe vp and choked it.
 some fell vpo good groude gaue frute.
 some an hundreth folde some sixtie folde some thirtie folde.
 who so hath eares to heare let hi heare.
 and the disciples came vnto him and sayde.
 why speakest thou to the by parables.
 he answered and sayde vnto the.
 vnto you it is geuen to knowe the mystery of the kingdome of heauen but vnto them it is not geuen.
 for whoso hath vnto him shal be geue and he shal haue abundaunce.
 but who so hath not from him shalbe taken awaye eue that he hath.
 therfore speake i vnto the by parables for with seynge eyes they se not with hearinge eares they heare not for they vnderstonde it not.
 and in them is fulfilled ye prophecie of esay which sayeth.
 ye shal heare in dede and shal not vnderstonde.
 and with seinge eyes shal ye se and not perceaue.
 for ye hert of this people is waxed grosse their eares are thick of hearige their eyes haue they closed lest they shulde once se wt ye eyes heare wt the eares vnderstode wt the hert turne that i might heale them.
 but blessed are youre eyes for they se.
 youre eares for they heare.
 verely i saye vnto you.
 many prophetes righteous men haue desyred to se ye thinges that ye se and haue not sene the.
 and to heare the thinges that ye heare and haue not herde the.
 heare ye therfore the parable of the sower.
 whan one heareth ye worde of the kyngdome and vnderstondeth it not the euell man cometh and plucketh it awaye that is sowne in his hert.
 this is he yt is sowne by the waye syde.
 but he yt is sowne in the stonye grounde is this.
 wha one heareth the worde anone with ioye receaueth it.
 neuertheles he hath no rote i him but endureth for a season.
 wha trouble persecucion aryseth because of the worde immediatly he his offended.
 as for him that is sowne amonge ye thornes this is he.
 wha one heareth the worde the carefulnes of this worlde the disceatfulnes of riches choke the worde so he becometh vnfrutefull.
 but he yt is sowne in the good grounde is this.
 whan one heareth the worde and vnderstondeth it and bringeth forth frute.
 and some geueth an hudreth folde some sixtie folde and some thirtie folde.
 another parable put he forth vnto the sayde.
 the kyngdome of heaue is like vnto a man yt sowed good sede in his felde.
 but whyle me slepte there came an enemye and sowed tares amonge ye wheate wente his waye.
 now wha the blade was sproge vp brought forth frute the ye tares appeared also.
 then came the seruautes to ye housholder sayde vnto him.
 syr sowdest not thou good sede in yi felde.
 fro whece the hath it tares.
 he sayde vnto the.
 that hath the enemye done.
 the sayde ye seruautes.
 wilt thou then yt we go wede the out.
 he sayde.
 no lest whyle ye wede out ye tares ye plucke vp the wheate also wt the.
 let the both growe together tyll the haruest and in tyme of haruest i wil saye vnto the reapers.
 gather ye tares first bynde the in sheeues to be bret.
 but gather the wheate in to my barne.
 another parable put he forth vnto the and sayde.
 the kyngdome of heauen is like vnto a grane of mustarde sede which a man toke and sowed it in his felde.
 which is the leest amonge all sedes.
 but whan it is growne it is the greatest amonge herbes and is a tre.
 so that the byrdes vnder the heauen come and dwell in the braunches of it.
 another parable spake he vnto the.
 the kyngdome of heaue is like vnto leue which a woman toke and myxte it amonge thre peckes of meele tyll all was leuended.
 all soch thinges spake iesus vnto ye people by parables without parables spake he nothinge vnto the.
 yt the thinge might be fulfilled which was spoke by ye prophet sayenge.
 i wil open my mouth in parables and wil speake out the secretes from the begynnynge of the worlde.
 then sent iesus the people awaye and came home.
 and his disciples came vnto hi and sayde.
 declare vnto us ye parable of ye tares of ye felde.
 iesus answered and sayde vnto them.
 he that soweth the good sede is the sonne of man.
 the felde is the worlde.
 ye good sede are the childre of the kyngdome.
 the tares are the children of wickednes.
 ye enemye that soweth the is the deuell.
 ye haruest is the ende of the worlde.
 ye reapers are ye angels.
 for like as ye tares are weded out and brent in the fyre eue so shal it go in ye ende of this worlde.
 the sonne of man shal sende forth his angels they shal gather out of his kingdome all thinges yt offende the yt do iniquyte shal cast the in to a fornace of fyre there shalbe waylinge and gnasshinge of teth.
 the shal the righteous shyne as the sonne in the kyngdome of their father.
 who so hath eares to heare let him heare.
 agayne the kingdome of heauen is like vnto a treasure hyd in the felde which a ma founde and hid it and for ioye therof he wete solde all yt he had and bought yt felde.
 agayne the kyngdome of heauen is like vnto a marchaut yt sought good pearles.
 wha he had founde a precious pearle he wete and solde all that he had bought it.
 agayne ye kyngdome of heaue is like vnto a nett cast in to ye see wherwith are take all maner of fyshes.
 wha it is ful me drawe it out vnto ye shore sytt gather ye good i to the vessels but cast the bad awaye.
 so shal it be also in ye ende of ye worlde.
 the angels shal go out seuer the bad fro the righteous shal cast the in to a fornace of fyre there shalbe waylinge gnasshinge of teth.
 and iesus sayde vnto them.
 haue ye vnderstode all these thinges.
 they sayde.
 yee lorde.
 then sayde he vnto the.
 therfore euery scribe taught vnto ye kingdome of heauen is like an houssholder which bryngeth out of his treasure thinges new and olde.
 and it came to passe wha iesus had ended these parables he departed thence and came in to his owne coutre and taught the in their synagoges.
 in so moch that they were astonnyed and sayde.
 whece cometh soch wyssdome power vnto him.
 is not this the carpeters sonne.
 is not his mother called mary.
 and his brethre iames ioses and symon and iude.
 and are not all his sisters here with us.
 whence hath he the all these thinges.
 and they were offended at him.
 but iesus sayde vnto the.
 a prophet is nowhere lesse sett by the at home amonge his owne.
 and he dyd not many miracles there because of their vnbeleue.
 at that tyme herode ye tetrarcha herde of ye fame of iesu sayde vnto his seruautes.
 this is iho ye baptist.
 he is rysen agayne fro the deed therfore are his dedes so mightie.
 for herode had take iho bounde hi put him in preson for herodias sake his brothers philips wife.
 for ihon sayde vnto him.
 it is not laufull for ye to haue her.
 and fayne wolde he haue put him to death but he feared the people because they helde him for a prophet.
 but whan herode helde his byrth daye the doughter of herodias daunsed before the and that pleased herode well wherfore he promysed her with an ooth yt he wolde geue her what soeuer she wolde axe.
 and she beynge instructe of hir mother afore sayde.
 geue me ihon baptistes heade in a platter.
 and the kynge was sory.
 neuertheles for ye ooth sake the yt sat with him at ye table he comaunded it to be geuen her and sent beheeded ihon in the preson.
 and his heed was brought in a platter and geuen to the damsell she brought it vnto her mother.
 then came his disciples and toke his body and buried it and wente and tolde iesus.
 whan iesus hetde yt he departed thence by shippe in to a desert place alone.
 and wha the people herde therof they folowed him on fote out of ye cities.
 and iesus wete forth and sawe moch people and had pytie vpon them and healed their sicke.
 but at euen his disciples came vnto him saide.
 this is a deserte place and ye night falleth on.
 let ye people departe from the that they maye go in to the townes and bye them vytayles.
 but iesus sayde vnto them.
 they nede not go awaye geue ye the to eate.
 the saide they vnto him.
 we haue here but fyue loaues and two fyshes.
 and he sayde.
 bringe the hither.
 and he comaunded ye people to syt downe vpon the grasse and toke ye fyue loaues and two fisshes and loked vp towarde heauen and gaue thankes and brake and gaue the loaues vnto the disciples and the disciples gaue them to the people.
 and they all ate and were suffised.
 and they gathered vp of the broken meate that remayned ouer twolue basskettes full.
 and they yt ate were aboute a fyue thousande men besyde wemen and children.
 and straight waye iesus made his disciples to entre in to a shippe to go ouer before hi tyll he had sent ye people awaye.
 and whan he had sent the people awaye he wete vp in to a mountayne alone to make his prayer.
 and at euen he was there him self alone.
 and ye shippe was allready in ye myddest of the see was tost wt wawes for the winde was cotrary.
 but in ye fourth watch of ye night iesus came vnto the walkinge vpon the see.
 and whan his disciples sawe him goinge vpon the see they were afrayed sayenge.
 it is some sprete and cried out for feare.
 but straight waye iesus spake vnto them and sayde.
 be of good cheare it is i be not afrayed.
 peter answered him saide.
 lorde yf it be thou byd me come vnto the vpon ye water.
 and he sayde.
 come on yi waye.
 and peter stepte out of the shippe wete vpon the water to come vnto iesus.
 but whan he sawe a mightie wynde he was afrayed begane to synke cried sayenge.
 lorde helpe me.
 and imediatly iesus stretched forth his hande caught him sayde vnto him.
 o thou of litle faith wherfore doutest thou.
 and they wente in to the shippe the wynde ceased.
 then they that were in ye shippe came fell downe before him sayde.
 of a trueth thou art ye sonne of god.
 and they shipped ouer came in to the lode of genazereth.
 and wha ye me of yt place had knowlege of hi they sent out in to all that coutre rounde aboute brought vnto him all that were sicke besought him that they might but touch the hemme of his vesture onely.
 as many as touched it were made whole.
 then came vnto him the scribes and pharises from ierusalem sayenge.
 why do thy disciples transgresse ye tradicions of the elders.
 for they wash not their hodes whan they eate bred.
 he answered sayde vnto the.
 why do ye transgresse the comaundemet of god because of youre owne tradicios.
 for god comaunded sayege.
 honoure father mother.
 he yt curseth father mother shal dye the death.
 but ye saye.
 euery man shal saye to father or mother.
 the thige yt i shulde helpe ye withal is geue vnto god.
 by this is it come to passe that no man honoureth his father or his mother eny more.
 and thus haue ye made the comaundement of god of none effecte for youre owne tradicios.
 ye ypocrites full well hath esaye prophecied of you sayde.
 this people draweth nye vnto me wt their mouth honoureth me wt their lippes howbeit their hert is farre fro me.
 but in vayne do they serue me whyle they teach soch doctrynes as are nothinge but the commaundementes of men.
 and he called ye people to hi saide vnto the.
 heare vnderstode.
 that which goeth in to the mouth defyleth not the ma.
 but yt which cometh out of the mouth defyleth ye ma.
 then came his disciples sayde vnto him.
 knowest thou yt the pharises were offended whan they herde this sayenge.
 he answered and sayde.
 all plantes which my heauenly father hath not planted shal be pluckte vp by ye rotes.
 let the go they are ye blynde leaders of ye blynde.
 wha one blinde leadeth another they fall both i ye diche.
 then answered peter sayde vnto him.
 declare vnto us this parable.
 and iesus sayde vnto the.
 are ye yet the without vnderstondinge.
 perceaue ye not yt what soeuer goeth in at ye mouth descedeth downe in to ye bely is cast out into the draught.
 but the thinge that proceadeth out of the mouth cometh fro ye hert that defyleth ye ma.
 for out of ye hert come euell thoughtes murthur breakynge of wedlocke whordome theft false witnesse blasphemy.
 these are ye thinges that defyle a man.
 but to eate wt vnwasshen hondes defyleth not a man.
 and iesus wente out from thence departed in to the coastes of tyre of sidon.
 and beholde a woma of canaan wete out of ye same coastes cried after him sayege.
 o lorde thou sonne of dauid haue mercy vpon me.
 my doughter is sore vexed wt a deuell.
 and he answered her neuer a worde.
 the came his disciples vnto him besought him sayege.
 sede her awaye for she crieth after us.
 but he answered saide.
 i am not sent but vnto the lost shepe of the house of israel.
 notwithstondinge she came fell downe before him sayde.
 lorde helpe me.
 he answered sayde.
 it is not good to take the childrens bred to cast it vnto dogges.
 it is trueth lorde sayde she neuertheles the whelpes eate of the crommes that fall fro their lordes table.
 then answered iesus sayde vnto her.
 o woma greate is yi faith be it vnto the eue as thou desyrest.
 and hir doughter was made hole at ye same houre.
 and iesus departed thece and came nye vnto the see of galile and wente vp in to a mountayne and sat downe there and there came vnto him moch people hauinge with them lame blynde dome crepell and other many and cast them downe at iesus fete.
 and he healed the in so moch that the people wodred to se the dome speake the crepell whole the halt to go the blynde to se.
 and they praysed the god of israel.
 and iesus called his disciples vnto him sayde.
 i haue copassion vpon the people for they haue cotynued wt me now thre dayes haue nothinge to eate i wil not let the departe fastynge lest they perishe in ye waye.
 and his disciples sayde vnto him.
 whence shulde we get so moch bred in the wyldernes that we might satissfie so moch people.
 and iesus sayde vnto the.
 how many loaues haue ye.
 they sayde.
 seue a few litle fyshes.
 and he comaunded ye people to syt downe vpo the grounde and toke ye seue loaues the fyshes gaue thankes brake the gaue the to his disciples ye disciples gaue the vnto the people.
 and they all ate were suffised.
 and they toke vp of the broke meate yt was left seuen basskettes full.
 and they yt ate were foure thousande me besyde wemen and children.
 and whan he had sent awaye the people he wente in to a shippe came in to the parties of magdala.
 then came the pharises saduces vnto him tepted him requyringe him to shewe the a toke from heaue.
 but he answered sayde.
 at eue ye saye.
 it wil be fayre wedder.
 for ye sskye is reed.
 and in ye mornynge ye saye.
 it wil be foule wedder to daye for the sskye is reed gloometh.
 o ye ypocrytes ye can discerne the fashion of ye sskye.
 can ye not the discerne the tokes of these tymes also.
 this euell and aduouterous generacio seketh a toke there shal no toke be geue the but the toke of ye prophet ionas.
 so he left the and departed.
 and wha his disciples were come to the other syde of the water they had forgotten to take bred wt them.
 iesus sayde vnto the.
 take hede bewarre of the leue of ye pharises of the saduces.
 the thought they in the selues sayege.
 we haue take no bred wt us.
 whe iesus perceaued yt he sayde to the.
 o ye of litle faith why are ye combred in yor mindes because ye haue take no bred wt you.
 do ye not yet perceaue.
 remembre ye not those fyue loaues whe there were fyue thousande me and how many basskettes toke ye vp.
 nether ye seue loaues whan there were foure thousande men how many baskettes toke ye vp.
 why perceaue ye not then yt i spake not to you of bred whe i saide.
 bewarre of ye leue of ye pharises of ye saduces.
 the vnderstode they how yt he had not the bewarre of the leue of bred but of ye doctryne of the pharises and of the saduces.
 then came iesus into the coastes of the cite cesarea philippi axed his disciples saide.
 who do me saie yt ye sonne of ma is.
 they sayde.
 some saye yt thou art iho the baptist some yt thou art elias some yt thou art ieremy or one of ye prophetes.
 he saide to the.
 but who saye ye yt i am.
 the answered symo peter and saide.
 thou art christ ye sonne of ye lyuinge god.
 and iesus answered saide vnto hi.
 blessed art thou symo ye sonne of ionas for flesh bloude hath not opened yt vnto the but my father yt is in heaue.
 and i saie to ye.
 thou art peter vpo this rocke wil i builde my cogregacion.
 and ye gates of hell shal not preuayle agaynst it.
 and the keyes of heauen wil i geue vnto the.
 whatsoeuer thou shalt bynde vpon earth shalbe bounde also in heauen.
 whatsoeuer thou shalt lowse vpon earth shalbe lowsed also in heaue.
 then charged he his disciples that they shulde tell no ma that he was iesus christ.
 from that tyme forth beganne iesus to shew vnto his disciples how that he must go vnto ierusale and suffre many thinges of the elders and of the hye prestes and of the scrybes and be put to death and ryse againe the thirde daye.
 but peter toke him asyde and beganne to rebuke him sayenge.
 lorde fauoure thy self let not this happen vnto the.
 neuertheles he turned him aboute sayde vnto peter.
 auoyde fro me satha thou hindrest me for thou sauourest not ye thinges that be of god but of men.
 then sayde iesus vnto his disciples.
 yf eny man wil folowe me let him forsake himself take vp his crosse and folowe me.
 for who so wil saue his life shal lose it.
 but whoso loseth his life for my sake shal fynde it.
 what helpeth it a man though he wanne the whole worlde and yet suffred harme in his soule.
 or what can a man geue to redeme his soule withall.
 for it wil come to passe that the sonne of ma shal come in the glory of his father with his angels and then shal he rewarde euery one acordinge to his dedes.
 verely i saye vnto you.
 there stonde here some which shal not taist of death tyll they se ye sonne of ma come in his kingdome.
 and after sixe dayes iesus toke peter iames and ihon his brother and brought them vp in to an hye mountayne out of the waye and was transfigured before the.
 his face shone as ye sonne and his clothes were as white as the light.
 and beholde there appeared vnto the moses and elias talkinge with him.
 then answered peter and sayde vnto iesus.
 lorde here is good beynge for us.
 yf thou wilt let us make here thre tabernacles.
 one for the one for moses and one for elias.
 whyle he yet spake beholde a bright cloude ouershadowed them.
 and lo there came a voyce out of the cloude saienge.
 this is my deare sonne in whom i delyte heare him.
 whan ye disciples herde that they fell vpon their faces and were sore afrayed.
 but iesus came and touched them and sayde.
 aryse and be not afrayed.
 and whan they loked vp they sawe no man but iesus onely.
 and wha they came downe fro ye mountayne iesus charged them and sayde.
 tell no man of this vision tyll the sonne of man be rysen agayne from ye deed.
 and his disciples axed him and sayde.
 why saye the scrybes then that elias must first come.
 iesus answered and sayde vnto them.
 elias shall come first in dede and bringe all thinges to right agayne.
 but i saye vnto you.
 elias is come all ready they knewe him not but haue done vnto him what they wolde.
 eue so shal also the sonne of man suffre of them.
 then the disciples perceaued that he spake vnto them of ihon the baptist.
 and whan they were come to the people there came vnto him a certayne man and kneled vnto him and sayde.
 lorde haue mercy vpon my sonne for he is lunatike sore vexed.
 he falleth oft tymes in to ye fyre and oft in to ye water.
 and i brought him vnto thy disciples and they coude not heale him.
 iesus answered and sayde.
 o thou faithles and frowarde generacion how longe shal i be with you.
 how longe shal i suffre you.
 bringe him hither to me.
 and iesus rebuked him and ye deuyll wete out of him and ye childe was healed euen that same houre.
 then came the disciples vnto iesus secretly sayde.
 why coude not we cast him out.
 iesus sayde vnto them.
 because of youre vnbeleue.
 for i saye verely vnto you.
 yf ye haue faith as a grane of mustarde sede ye maye saye vnto this mountayne.
 remoue hence to yonder place and he shal remoue nether shal enythinge be vnpossible vnto you how beit this kinde goeth not out but by prayer and fastynge.
 whyle they occupied in galile iesus sayde vnto them.
 it wil come to passe that the sonne of man shalbe delyuered in to the hondes of men and they shal kyll him and the thirde daye shal he aryse agayne.
 and they were very sory.
 now wha they were come to capernaum they that receaued ye tribute money came to peter and sayde.
 doth youre master paye tribute.
 he sayed.
 yee.
 and when he was come home iesus preuented him and sayde.
 what thinkest thou symon.
 of whom do the kynges of the earth take toll or tribute.
 of their children or of straungers.
 then sayde peter to him.
 of straungers.
 iesus sayde vnto him.
 then are ye children fre.
 neuertheles lest we offende them go thy waye to the see and cast thine angle and take the fysh that first cometh vp and whan thou hast opened his mouth thou shalt fynde a pece of twenty pens take that and geue it them for me and the.
 at the same tyme came the disciples vnto iesus and sayde.
 who is the greatest in the kyngdome of heauen.
 and iesus called a childe vnto him and set him in the myddest amonge them and sayde.
 verely i saye vnto you.
 excepte ye turne and become as children ye shal not entre into the kyngdome of heauen.
 whosoeuer therfore humbleth him self as this childe ye same is the greatest in ye kyngdome of heauen.
 and who so receaueth soch a childe in my name receaueth me.
 but who so offendeth one of these litle ones which beleue in me it were better for him that a mylstone were hanged aboute his neck and he drowned in the depth of the see.
 wo vnto the worlde because of slauders.
 yee there must slaunders come.
 but wo vnto that man by whom slaunder commeth.
 but yf thy hande or thy fote offende the cut him of and cast him from the.
 it is better for ye to entre in vnto life lame or crepell the yt thou shuldest haue two hodes or two fete and be cast in to euerlastinge fyre.
 and yf thyne eye offende the plucke it out cast it from the.
 better it is for the to entre in vnto life with one eye the to haue two eyes and to be cast in to hell fyre.
 take hede yt ye despyse not one of these litle ones.
 for i saye vnto you.
 their angels do alwaye beholde the face of my father which is in heauen.
 for the sonne of man is come to saue that which is lost.
 how thinke ye.
 yf a man haue an hundreth shepe and one of the be gone astraye doth not he leaue the nyentie and nyene in the mountaynes and goeth and seketh that one which is gone astraye.
 and yf it happen that he fynde it verely i saye vnto you.
 he reioyseth more ouer it then ouer the nyentie nyene which wete not astraye.
 euen so is it not the will before youre father in heauen that one of these litle ones shulde perishe.
 yf thy brother trespace agaynst the go and tell him his faute betwene the and him alone.
 yf he heare the thou hast wone thy brother.
 but yf he heare the not then take yet with the one or two that in the mouth of two or thre wytnesses euery matter maye be stablyshed.
 yf he heare not them tell it vnto the congregacion.
 yf he heare not the cogregacion holde him as an heithen and publican.
 verely i saye vnto you.
 what soeuer ye shal bynde vpon earth shalbe boude also in heauen.
 what soeuer ye lowse vpon earth shalbe lowsed also in heaue.
 agayne i saye vnto you.
 yf two of you shal agree vpon earth for what thinge soeuer it be yt they wolde desyre they shal haue it of my father which is in heaue.
 for where two or thre are gathered together i my name there am i in the myddest amonge them.
 then came peter vnto him sayde lorde how oft shal i forgeue my brother yt trespaceth agaynst me.
 seue tymes.
 iesus saide vnto hi.
 i saye not vnto ye seue tymes but seuetie tymes seuen tymes.
 therfore is ye kingdome of heaue lickened vnto a kynge which wolde reken wt his seruauntes.
 and whan he beganne to reke one was brought vnto him which ought him ten thousande poude.
 now wha he had nothinge to paye his lorde comaunded him to be solde his wife his childre all yt he had payment to be made.
 then the seruaunt fell downe besought him sayenge.
 syr haue paciece wt me and i wil paye the all.
 then had the lorde pytie on that seruaunt discharged him and forgaue him the dett.
 and the same seruaunt wete out foude one of his felowes which ought him an hudreth pens and layed hande vpon him and toke him by the throte and sayde.
 paye me that thou owest.
 the his felowe fell downe and besought him sayenge.
 haue paciece wt me and i wil paye the all neuertheles he wolde not but wente and cast him in to preson tyll he shulde paye the dett.
 whan his felowes sawe what was done they were very sory and came and tolde their lorde all that had happened.
 then his lorde called for him and sayde vnto him.
 o thou wicked seruaut i forgaue the all this dett because thou praydest me.
 shuldest not thou then haue had compassion also vpon thy felowe euen as i had pytie vpon the.
 and his lorde was wroth and delyuered him vnto the iaylers tyll he payed all that he ought.
 so shal my heauenly father do also vnto you yf ye euery one of you fro youre hertes forgeue not his brother his trespaces.
 and it came to passe wha iesus had ended these sayenges he gat him fro galile came i to ye coastes of iewry beyonde iordane moch people folowed him and he healed them there.
 then came vnto him the pharises tepted him sayde vnto him.
 is it laufull for a man to put awaye his wife for eny maner of cause.
 he answered sayde vnto the.
 haue ye not red how yt he which made man at the begynnynge made the ma woma sayde.
 for this cause shal a ma leaue father mother cleue vnto his wife they two shalbe one fleshe.
 now are they not twayne then but one flesh.
 let not man therfore put a sunder yt which god hath coupled together.
 then sayde they.
 why dyd moses then comaunde to geue a testimonyall of deuorsement to put her awaye.
 he sayde vnto the.
 moses because of ye hardnes of yor hertes suffred you to put awaye youre wyues.
 neuertheles fro the begynnynge it hath not bene so.
 but i saye vnto you.
 whosoeuer putteth awaye his wife excepte it be for fornicacion and marieth another breaketh wedlocke.
 and who so marieth her yt is deuorced commytteth aduoutrye.
 then sayde his disciples vnto him.
 yf ye matter be so betwene ma and wife the is it not good to mary.
 but he sayde vnto them.
 all me can not coprehende yt sayenge saue they to who it is geue.
 for there be some gelded which are so borne from their mothers wombe.
 and there be some gelded which are gelded of men.
 there be some gelded which haue gelded the selues for the kyngdome of heauens sake.
 he that can coprehende it let him comprehe then were brought vnto him yoge children yt he shulde put his hondes vpon the praye.
 and ye disciples rebuked them.
 but iesus sayde.
 suffre ye childre forbyd the not to come vnto me for vnto soch belogeth the kyngdome of heauen.
 and wha he had layed his hodes vpo the he departed thece.
 and beholde one came vnto him and sayde.
 good master what good shal i do yt i maye haue the euer lastinge life.
 he sayde vnto him.
 why callest thou me good.
 there is none good but god onely.
 neuertheles yf thou wilt entre into life kepe ye comaudemetes.
 the sayde he vnto him.
 which.
 iesus saide.
 thou shalt not kyll.
 thou shalt not breake wedlocke.
 thou shalt not steale.
 thou shalt beare no false wytnes.
 honoure father and mother.
 and thou shalt loue thy neghboure as thy self.
 then sayde the yonge ma vnto him.
 all these haue i kepte fro my youth vp.
 what lack i yet.
 iesus sayde vnto him.
 yf thou wilt be perfecte go thy waye and sell that thou hast geue it vnto the poore and thou shalt haue a treasure in heauen and come and folowe me.
 whan ye yonge man herde yt worde he wente awaye sory for he had greate possessions.
 iesus sayde vnto his disciples.
 verely i saie vnto you.
 it shalbe harde for a rich man to entre in to the kyngdome of heaue.
 and morouer i saye vnto you.
 it is easier for a camell to go thorow the eye of a nedle the for a rich man to entre in to the kyngdome of heauen.
 whan his disciples herde that they were exceadingly amased and sayde.
 who can the be saued.
 neuertheles iesus behelde them and sayde vnto them.
 with men it is vnpossyble but with god all thinges are possyble.
 then answered peter sayde vnto him.
 beholde we haue forsake all and folowed the.
 what shal we haue therfore.
 iesus sayde vnto the.
 verely i saye vnto you.
 that when the sonne of man shal sytt in the seate of his maiestye ye which haue folowed me in the new byrth shal syt also vpon twolue seates and iudge ye twolue trybes of israel.
 and who so euer forsaketh houses or brethre or sisters or father or mother or wife or children or londes for my names sake the same shal receaue an hundreth folde and inheret euerlastinge life.
 but many that be the first shalbe the last.
 and the last shalbe the first.
 the kyngdome of heauen is like vnto an housholder which wete out early in the mornynge to hyre labourers in to his vyniarde.
 and wha he had agreed with the labourers for a peny a daye he sent the in to his vynyarde.
 and aboute ye thirde houre he wente out and sawe other stondinge ydle in the market place and sayde vnto them.
 go ye also in to my vynyarde what so euer is right i wil geue it you.
 and they wete their waye.
 agayne he wete out aboute the sixte and nyenth houre and dyd likewyse and aboute the eleuenth houre he wete out and founde other stodynge ydle and sayde vnto them.
 why stonde ye here all the daye ydle.
 they sayde vnto him.
 because no man hath hyred us.
 he saide vnto the.
 go ye also in to my vinyarde and loke what is right ye shal haue it.
 now whan euen was come the lorde of the vynyarde sayde vnto his stewarde.
 call the labourers and geue them their hyre begynnynge from the last vnto ye first.
 then they that were hyred aboute the eleuenth houre came and receaued euery man a peny.
 but whan the first came they supposed that they shulde receaue more.
 and they also receaued euery man a peny.
 and whan they had receaued it they murmured agaynst the housholder and sayde.
 these last haue wrought but one houre and thou hast made the equall vnto us which haue borne the burthen and heate of the daye.
 he answered and sayde vnto one of them.
 frende i do ye no wronge.
 diddest not thou agree with me for a peny.
 take that thine is and go thy waye.
 i wil geue vnto this last also like as vnto the.
 or haue i not power to do as me listeth with myne owne.
 is thine eye euell because i am good.
 so the last shalbe the first the first the last.
 for many are called but few are chosen.
 and iesus wente vp to ierusalem and toke the twolue disciples asyde in the waye and sayde vnto them.
 beholde we go vp to ierusalem and the sonne of man shalbe delyuered vnto the hye prestes and scribes.
 they shal condemne him to death and shal delyuer him vnto ye heithen to be mocked to be scourged and to be crucified.
 and the thirde daye he shal ryse agayne.
 then came vnto him the mother of zebedes childre with hir sonnes fell downe before him and desyred a certayne thinge of hi.
 and he saide vnto her.
 what wilt thou.
 she sayde vnto him.
 let these two sonnes of myne syt in thy kyngdome.
 the one vpon thy right honde the other vpon thy left honde.
 but iesus answered and sayde.
 ye wote not what ye axe.
 maye ye drynke the cuppe that i shal drynke.
 to be baptised with the baptyme that i shalbe baptysed withall.
 they sayde vnto him.
 yee that we maye.
 and he sayde vnto them.
 my cuppe truly shal ye drynke with the baptyme yt i shal be baptysed withall shal ye be baptysed.
 neuertheles to syt vpon my right honde on my left is not myne to geue but vnto the whan the ten herde that they disdayned at the two brethren.
 but iesus called them vnto him and sayde.
 ye knowe that ye prynces of the worlde haue domynacion of the people and the greatest exercise power amonge the.
 it shal not be so amonge you.
 but whoso euer wyl be greate amonge you let him be youre mynister.
 who soeuer wyl be chefe let him be youre seruaunt.
 euen as the sonne of man came not to be serued but to do seruyce and to geue his life to a redepcion for many.
 and when they departed from iericho moch people folowed him.
 and beholde two blyndemen sat by the waye syde.
 and when they herde that iesus passed by they cried sayde.
 o lorde thou sonne dauidhaue mercy vpon vs.
 but ye people rebuked the that they shulde holde their peace.
 neuertheles they cried the more sayde.
 o lorde thou sonne of dauid haue mercy vpon vs.
 and iesus stode styll and called them and sayde.
 what wil ye yt i shal do vnto you.
 they sayde vnto him.
 lorde that oure eyes maye be opened.
 and iesus had compassion vpon them and touched their eyes.
 immediatly their eies receaued sight.
 and they folowed him.
 now whan they drew nye vnto ierusalem and were come to bethphage vnto mount oliuete iesus sent two of his disciples and sayde vnto them.
 go in to the towne that lyeth before you anone ye shal fynde an asse bounde and hir foale with her.
 lowse them and brynge the vnto me.
 and yf eny man saye ought vnto you saye ye.
 the lorde hath nede of the and straight waye he wil let them go.
 but all this was done that the thinge might be fulfylled which was spoken by the prophet sayenge.
 tell the doughter of sion.
 beholde thy kynge commeth vnto ye meke syttinge vpon an asse and a foale of ye asse vsed to the yocke.
 the disciples wente and dyd as iesus commaunded them and brought the asse and the foale layed their clothes vpon them and set him theron.
 but many of the people spred their garmentes in the waye.
 other cut downe braunches from the trees and strawed them in the waye.
 as for the people that wente before and that came after they cryed and sayde.
 hosianna vnto the sonne of dauid blessed be he that commeth in the name of the lorde hosianna in the height.
 and whan he was come in to ierusalem all the cite was moued and sayde.
 who is this.
 and the people sayde.
 this is iesus ye prophet of nazareth out of galile.
 and iesus wente in to the teple of god and cast out all them that bought and solde in the teple and ouerthrew the tables of the money chaungers and the seates of them that solde doues and sayde vnto them.
 it is wrytte.
 my house shalbe called ye house of prayer but ye haue made it a denne of murthurers.
 the blynde also and ye lame came vnto him in the temple and he healed them.
 but whan the hye prestes and the scrybes sawe the wonders that he dyd and the children crienge in the temple and sayenge.
 hosianna vnto the sonne of dauid they disdayned and sayde vnto him.
 hearest thou what these saye.
 iesus sayde vnto them.
 yee.
 haue ye neuer red.
 out of the mouth of very babes and sucklinges thou hast ordeyned prayse.
 and he left them there and wente out of the cite vnto bethania and there abode ouer night.
 but in the mornynge as he returned in to the cite he hugred.
 and in the waye he sawe a fygge tre and came vnto it and founde nothinge theron but leaues onely and sayde vnto it.
 neuer frute growe on the from hence forth.
 and immediatly the fygge tre wythred awaye.
 and whan his disciples sawe that they marueyled and sayde.
 how is ye fygge tre wythred awaye so soone.
 iesus answered and sayde vnto them.
 verely i saye vnto you.
 yf ye haue faith doute not ye shal not onely do this with the fygge tre but yf ye shal saye vnto this mountayne.
 avoyde and cast thy self in to the see it shal be done.
 and what soeuer ye axe in prayer yf ye beleue ye shal receaue it.
 and when he was come in to the teple the chefe prestes and the elders of the people came vnto him as he was teachinge sayde.
 by what auctorite doest thou these thinges.
 and who gaue the this auctorite.
 iesus answered and sayde vnto them.
 i wil axe a worde of you also.
 which yf ye tell me i in like wyse wyl tell you by what auctorite i do these thinges.
 the baptime of iho whece was it.
 from heaue or of men.
 then thought they amoge them selues and saide.
 yf we saye it was from heaue then shal he saye vnto us.
 why dyd ye not then beleue him.
 but yf we saye it was of men the feare we the people.
 for euery ma helde ihon for a prophet.
 and they answered iesus sayde.
 we can not tell.
 then sayde he vnto them.
 nether tell i you by what auctorite i do these thinges.
 but what thinke ye.
 a certayne man had two sonnes and came to the first and sayde.
 go thy waye my sonne worke to daye in my vynyarde.
 he answered and sayde.
 i wil not but afterwarde he repented and wente.
 he came also vnto the secode and sayde likewyse.
 and he answered and saide.
 i wil syr.
 and wete not.
 whether of them twayne dyd the wil of the father.
 they sayde vnto him.
 the first.
 iesus sayde vnto the.
 verely i saye vnto you.
 the publicans and harlottes shal come in to the kyngdome of god before you.
 for ihon came vnto you and taught you ye right waye and ye beleued him not.
 but the publicans harlottes beleued hi.
 as for you though ye sawe it yet were ye not moued with repetaunce that ye might afterwarde haue beleued him.
 heare another parable.
 there was a certayne houssholder which planted a vynyarde and hedged it roude aboute and dygged a wyne presse in it and built a tower and let it out vnto hussbandmen and wente in to a straunge countre.
 now wha the tyme of the frute drew neare he sent his seruautes to the hussbandmen to receaue the frutes of it.
 then the hussbandmen caught his seruauntes.
 one they bett another they kylled the thirde they stoned.
 agayne he sent other seruauntes moo then the first and they dyd vnto them in like maner.
 at the last he sent his owne sonne vnto them and sayde.
 they wyl stode in awe of my sonne.
 but whe the hussbandme sawe the sonne they sayde amonge the selues.
 this is the heyre come let us kyl hym and take his inheritauce vnto oure selues.
 and they caught him and thrust him out of the vynyarde slew him.
 now whe the lorde of the vynyarde commeth what wyl he do wt those hussbandmen.
 they sayde vnto him.
 he wyl cruelly destroye those euell personnes let out his vyniarde vnto other hussbadmen which shal delyuer him the frute at tymes conuenyent.
 iesus sayde vnto the.
 dyd ye neuer rede in the scriptures.
 the same stone which the buylders refused is become the heade stone in the corner.
 this was the lordes doynge it is maruelous i oure eyes therfore i saie vnto you.
 the kingdome of god shalbe take fro you shalbe geue vnto the heithe which shal brynge forth ye frutes of it.
 and who so falleth vpo this stone shalbe broke in peces.
 loke vpo whom it falleth it shal grynde him to poulder.
 and when the hye prestes pharises herde his parables they perceaued that he spake of them.
 and they wente aboute to take him but they feared ye people because they helde hi for a prophet.
 and iesus answered and spake vnto the agayne by parables sayde.
 the kingdome of heauen is like vnto a kynge which maried his sonne.
 and sent forth his seruauntes to call the gestes vnto the mariage they wolde not come.
 agayne he sent forth other seruauntes and sayde.
 tell the gestes.
 beholde i haue prepared my dynner myne oxen and my fed catell are kylled and all thinges are readye come to the mariage.
 but they made light of it and wente their wayes.
 one to his hussbandrye another to his marchaundise.
 as for the remnaut they toke his seruauntes and intreated the shamefully and slew the.
 when the kynge herde that he was wroth and sent forth his warryers and destroyed those murtherers and set fyre vpon their cite.
 then sayde he vnto his seruauntes.
 the mariage in dede is prepared but the gestes were not worthy.
 go youre waye out therfore in to ye hye wayes and as many as ye fynde byd them to the mariage.
 and the seruauntes wete out in to the hye wayes and gathered together as many as they coulde fynde both good and bad the tables were all full.
 then the kynge wete in to se the gestes and spyed there a man that had not on a weddynge garment and sayde vnto him.
 frende how camest thou in hither hast not on a weddyinge garment.
 and he was euen spechlesse.
 then sayde the kynge vnto his seruauntes.
 take and bynde him hande and fote cast him into ye vtter darcknes.
 there shal be waylinge and gnasshinge of teth.
 for many be called but few are chose.
 then wente the pharises and toke councell how they might tangle him in his wordes and sent vnto him their disciples with herodes officers and sayde.
 master we knowe that thou art true and teachest the waye of god truly and carest for no ma.
 for thou regardest not the outwarde appearaunce of me.
 tell us therfore how thinkest thou.
 is it laufulll to geue tribute vnto the emperoure or not.
 now wha iesus perceaued their wickednes he sayde.
 o ye ypocrites why tepte ye me.
 shewe me ye tribute money.
 and they toke hi a peny.
 and he saide vnto the.
 whose is this ymage and superscription.
 they sayde vnto him.
 the emperours.
 then sayde he vnto them.
 geue therfore vnto the emperour that which is the emperours.
 and geue vnto god that which is gods.
 when they herde that they marueyled and left him wete their waye.
 the same daye there came vnto him the saduces which holde that there is no resurreccion and axed him and sayde.
 master moses sayde.
 yf a man dye hauynge no children his brother shal mary his wife rayse vp sede vnto his brother.
 now were there with us seue brethren.
 the first maried a wife and dyed.
 for somoch as he had no sede he left his wife vnto his brother.
 like wyse the secode and thirde vnto the seueth.
 last of all the woman dyed also.
 now in the resurreccion whose wife shal she be of the seuen.
 for they all had her.
 iesus answered and sayde vnto them.
 ye erre and vnderstode not the scriptures ner the power of god.
 in the resurreccion they shal nether mary ner be maried but are as the angels of god in heauen.
 as touchinge the resurreccio of the deed haue ye notred what is spoken vnto you of god which sayeth.
 i am the god of abraham and ye god of isaac and the god of iacob.
 yet is not god a god of the deed but of the lyuynge.
 and whan the people herde that they were astonnyed at his doctryne.
 when the pharises herde that he had stopped the mouth of the saduces they gathered them selues together.
 and one of them a scrybe tepted him and sayde.
 master which is the chefest commaundemet in the lawe.
 iesus saide vnto him.
 thou shalt loue the lorde thy god with all thy hert with all thy soule and with all thy mynde.
 this is the pryncipall and greatest comaundement.
 as for the seconde it is like vnto it.
 thou shalt loue thy neghboure as thy self.
 in these two commaundementes hange all the lawe and the prophetes.
 now whyle the pharises were gathered together iesus axed them and sayde.
 what thinke ye of christ.
 whose sonne is he.
 they sayde vnto him.
 dauids.
 he sayde vnto them.
 how then doth dauid in sprete call him lorde sayenge.
 the lorde sayde vnto my lorde.
 syt thou on my right honde tyll i make thine enemies thy fote stole.
 yf dauid now call him lorde how is he then his sonne.
 and no man coude answere him one worde nether durst eny man axe him eny mo questios fro that daye forth.
 then spake iesus vnto ye people and to his disciples and sayde.
 the scrybes pharises are set downe vpon moses seate.
 therfore whatsoeuer they bid you obserue that obserue and do but after their workes shal ye not do for they saye do not.
 for they bynde heuy and intollerable burthens and laye them vpon mens shulders.
 but they them selues wil not heaue at them with one of their fyngers.
 all their workes do they to be sene of men.
 they set abrode their philateries and make large borders vpon their garmentes and loue to syt vppermost at the table and to haue the chefe seates in the synagoges and loue to be saluted in the market and to be called of me rabbi.
 but ye shal not suffre youre selues to be called rabbi for one is youre master euen christ and all ye are brethren.
 and call no man father vpon earth for one is youre father which is in heaue.
 and ye shal not suffre youre selues to be called masters for one is youre master namely christ.
 he that is greatest amoge you shalbe youre seruaunt.
 for who so exalteth himself shal be brought lowe.
 and he that humbleth himself shalbe exalted.
 wo vnto you scrybes and pharises ye ypocrytes that shut vp the kyngdome of heauen before men.
 ye come not in youre selues nether suffre ye them to enter that wolde be in.
 wo vnto you scrybes and pharises ye ypocrytes that deuoure wyddowes houses and that vnder the culoure of prayenge longe prayers therfore shal ye receaue ye greater damnacion.
 wo vnto you scrybes and pharises ye ypocrytes which compasse see and lode to make one proselyte.
 and whan he is become one ye make of him a childe of hell two folde more then ye youre selues are.
 wo vnto you blyndegydes which saye.
 who so euer sweareth by the temple that is nothinge.
 but who so euer sweareth by the golde of the temple he is giltie.
 ye fooles and blynde whether is greater.
 the golde or the teple that sanctifieth the golde.
 and who so euer sweareth by the altare that is nothinge.
 but who so euer sweareth by the offeringe that is vpo it he is giltye.
 ye fooles and blynde whether is greater.
 the offeringe or the altare that sanctifieth the offerynge.
 therfore who so sweareth by the altare sweareth by the same and by all that is theron.
 and who so sweareth by the temple sweareth by the same and by him that dwelleth therin.
 and who so sweareth by heauen sweareth by the seate of god and by him that sytteth theron.
 wo vnto you scrybes and pharises ye ypocrytes which tythe mynt anyse and commyn and leaue the waightier matters of the lawe behynde.
 namely iudgment mercy and fayth.
 these ought to haue bene done and not to leaue the other behynde.
 o ye blynde gydes which strayne out a gnat but swalowe vp a camell.
 wo vnto you scrybes and pharises ye ypocrytes which make cleane the vttersyde of the cuppe and platter but within are ye full of robbery and excesse.
 thou blynde pharise clense first the in syde of the cuppe and platter that the out syde maye be cleane also.
 wo vnto you scrybes and pharises ye ypocrites which be like vnto paynted sepulcres that appeare beutyfull outwarde but within they are full of deed mens bones and all fylthines.
 euen so are ye also.
 outwarde ye appeare righteous vnto men but within ye are full of ypocrisye and iniquyte.
 wo vnto you scrybes and pharises ye ypocrites which buylde the tombes of the prophetes and garnysh the sepulcres of the righteous and saye.
 yf we had bene in oure fathers tyme we wolde not haue bene partakers with them in the bloude of the prophetes.
 therfore ye be wytnesses vnto youre selues that ye are the children of them which slew the prophetes.
 go to fulfyll ye also the measure of youre fathers.
 o ye serpentes o ye generacion of vypers how wyl ye escape the damnacion of hell.
 therfore beholde i sende vnto you prophetes and wysemen and scrybes and some of them shal ye kyll and crucifye and some of them shal ye scourge in youre synagoges and persecute them from cite to cite.
 that vpon you maye come all the righteous bloude which hath bene shed vpon ye earth from the bloude of righteous abel vnto ye bloude of zachary ye sonne of barachias whom ye slew betwene the temple and the altare.
 verely i saye vnto you.
 all these thinges shal light vpo this generacion.
 o ierusalem ierusalem thou that slayest the prophetes and stonest them that are sent vnto the.
 how oft wolde i haue gathered thy children together euen as the henne gathereth hir chekens vnder hir wynges and ye wolde not.
 beholde youre habitacion shalbe left vnto you desolate.
 for i saye vnto you.
 ye shal not se me hence forth tyll ye saye.
 blessed be he that commeth in the name of the lorde.
 and iesus wente out and departed from the temple and his disciples came vnto him to shew him the buyldinge of the temple.
 but iesus sayde vnto them.
 se ye not all these thinges.
 verely i saye vnto you.
 there shal not be left here one stone vpon another yt shal not be cast downe.
 and as he sat vpon the mount oliuete his disciples came vnto him secretly saide.
 tell us whe shal these thinges come to passe.
 and which shal be the token of thy comynge and of the ende of the worlde.
 iesus answered and sayde vnto them.
 take hede that no man disceaue you.
 for there shal many come in my name and saye.
 i am christ and shal disceaue many.
 ye shal heare of warres and of ye noyse of warres.
 take hede and be not ye troubled.
 all these thinges must first come to passe but the ende is not yet.
 for one people shall ryse vp agaynst another and one realme agaynst another.
 and there shalbe pestilece honger and earthquakes here there.
 all these are the begynnynge of sorowes.
 then shal they put you to trouble shal kyll you and ye shalbe hated of all people for my names sake.
 the shal many be offended and shal betraye one another and shal hate one the other.
 and many false prophetes shal aryse and shal disceaue many.
 and because iniquyte shal haue the vpper hande the loue of many shal abate.
 but whoso endureth vnto ye ende ye same shal be saued.
 and this gospell of the kyngdome shalbe preached in all the worlde for a wytnes vnto all people and then shal the ende come.
 whan ye therfore shal se the abhominacion of desolacion wher of it is spoke by daniel the prophet stonde in the holy place who so readeth it let him marck it well the let the which be in iewry flye vnto ye moutaynes.
 and let him which is on the house toppe not come downe to fet eny thinge out of his house.
 and let him which is in ye felde not turne back to fetch his clothes.
 but wo vnto them that are with childe and to them that geue suck in those dayes.
 but praye ye that youre flight be not in ye wynter ner on the sabbath.
 for then shal there be greate trouble soch as was not from the begynnynge of the worlde vnto this tyme ner shalbe.
 yee and excepte those daies shulde be shortened there shulde no flesh be saued.
 but for ye chosens sake those dayes shalbe shortened.
 then yf eny man shal saye vnto you.
 lo here is christ or there beleue it not.
 for there shal aryse false christes and false prophetes and shal do greate tokes and wonders.
 in so moch that yf it were possible the very chosen shulde be brought in to erroure.
 beholde i haue tolde you before.
 wherfore yf they shal saye vnto you.
 beholde he is in the wildernes go not ye forth.
 beholde he is in the chamber beleue it not.
 for like as the lightenynge goeth out from the east and shyneth vnto the west so shal the commynge of the sonne of man be.
 for where so euer a deed carcase is there wyl the aegles be gathered together.
 immediatly after the trouble of the same tyme shal the sonne and moone lose their light and the starres shall fall from heauen and the powers of heauen shal moue.
 and then shal appeare the token of the sonne of man in heaue.
 and then shal all the kynreds of the earth mourne and they shal se the sonne of man come in the cloudes of heauen with greate power and glory.
 and he shal sende his angels with ye greate voyce of a trompe they shal gather together his chosen from the foure wyndes from one ende of the heauen to the other.
 lerne a symilitude of ye fygge tre.
 when his braunche is yet tender and his leaues spronge ye knowe that sommer is nye.
 so likewyse ye whan ye se all thynges be ye sure that it is nye euen at the dores verely i saye vnto you.
 this generacion shal not passe tyll all these be fulfylled.
 heauen and earth shal perishe but my wordes shal not perishe.
 neuertheles of that daye houre knoweth no man no not the angels of heauen but my father onely.
 euen as it was in the tyme of noe so shal the commynge of the sonne of man be also.
 for as they were in the dayes before ye floude they ate they dronke they maried and were maried euen vnto the daye yt noe entred in to the shippe and they regarded it not tyll the floude came and toke them all awaye so shal also the commynge of the sonne of man be.
 the shal two be in the felde.
 the one shal be receauedand the other shalbe refused.
 two shalbe gryndinge at the myll the one shalbe receaued and the other shalbe refused.
 watch therfore for ye knowe not what houre youre lorde wil come.
 but be sure of this that yf the good man of the house knewe what houre the thefe wolde come he wolde surely watch and not suffre his house to be broken vp.
 therfore be ye ready also for in the houre that ye thynke not shal the sonne of man come.
 who is now a faithfull and wyse seruaut whom his lorde hath made ruler ouer his houssholde that he maye geue them meate in due season.
 blessed is yt seruaut whom his lorde whan he cometh shal fynde so doynge.
 verely.
 i saye vnto you.
 he shal set him ouer all his goodes.
 but and yf the euell seruaut shal saye in his hert.
 tush it wil be longe or my lorde come and begynne to smyte his felowes yee and to eate and drynke with the dronken.
 the same seruautes lorde shal come in a daye wha he loketh not for him and in an houre that he is not ware of and shal hew him in peces and geue him his rewarde with ypocrytes.
 there shal be waylinge and gnasshinge of teth.
 then shal the kyngdome of heauen be like vnto ten virgins which toke their lapes and wente forth to mete the brydegome.
 but fyue of them were foolish and fyue were wyse.
 the foolish toke their lapes neuertheles they toke none oyle with them.
 but the wyse toke oyle in their vessels with their lampes.
 now whyle the brydegrome taried they slombred all and slepte.
 but at mydnight there was a crye made.
 beholde the brydegrome commeth go youre waye out for to mete him.
 then all those virgins arose and prepared their lampes.
 but the foolish sayde vnto the wyse.
 geue vs of youre oyle for oure lapes are gone out.
 then answered the wyse and sayde.
 not so lest there be not ynough for vs and you but go rather vnto them that sell and bye for youre selues.
 and whyle they wente to bye the brydegrome came.
 and they that were readye wente in with him vnto the mariage and the gate was shut vp.
 at ye last came ye other virgins also and sayde.
 lorde lorde opo vnto vs.
 but he answered and sayde.
 verely i saye vnto you.
 i knowe you not.
 watch ye therfore for ye knowe nether the daye ner yet the houre whan ye sonne of man shal come.
 like wyse as a certayne ma ready to take his iourney into a straunge countre called his seruautes and delyuered his goodes vnto the.
 and vnto one he gaue fyue talentes to another two and to another one.
 vnto euery man after his abilyte and straight waye departed.
 then he that had receaued the fyue talentes wente and occupied with the same and wanne other fyue talentes.
 likewyse he yt receaued two talentes wane other two also.
 but he that receaued ye one wente and dygged a pyt in the earth and hyd his lordes money.
 after a longe season the lorde of those seruauntes came and rekened with them.
 then came he that had receaued fyue talentes and brought other fyue talentes and sayde.
 syr thou delyuerdst vnto me fyue talentes.
 beholde with them haue i wonne fyue taletes mo.
 then sayde his lorde vnto hi.
 wel thou good faithfull seruaunt thou hast bene faithfull ouer litle i wil set the ouer moch.
 entre thou in to the ioye of thy lorde.
 the came he also that had receaued two talentes and sayde.
 syr thou delyuerdst vnto me two talentes.
 beholde i haue wonne two other taletes with the.
 his lorde sayde vnto him.
 wel thou good and faithfull seruaut thou hast bene faithfull ouer litle i wil set the ouer moch.
 entre thou in to the ioye of thy lorde.
 then he that had receaued the one talet came and sayde.
 syr i knew that thou art an hard man.
 thou reapest where thou hast not sowen and gatherest where thou hast not strowed and so i was afrayed and wete and hyd thy talent in the earth.
 lo there thou hast thine owne.
 but his lorde answered and sayde vnto him.
 thou euell and slouthfull seruaunt knewest thou that i reape where i sowed not and gather where i strawed not.
 thou shuldest therfore haue had my money to the chaungers and then at my commynge shulde i haue receaued myne owne with vauntage.
 therfore take the talent fro him and geue it vnto him that hath ten talentes.
 for who so hath to him shalbe geuen and he shal haue abundaunce.
 but who so hath not fro him shalbe take awaye euen that he hath.
 and cast the vnprofitable seruaunt in to vtter darcknes.
 there shalbe waylinge and gnasshinge of teth.
 but whan the sonne of man shal come in his glory and all holy angels with him then shal he syt vpon the seate of his glory.
 and all people shalbe gathered before him.
 and he shal separate them one from another as a shepherde deuydeth the shepe from ye goates.
 and he shal set ye shepe on his right honde and the goates on the lefte.
 then shal the kynge saye vnto them that shalbe on his right honde.
 come hither ye blessed of my father inheret ye ye kingdome which is prepared for you from the begynnynge of the worlde.
 for i was hongrie and ye gaue me meate.
 i was thirstie and ye gaue me drynke.
 i was harbourlesse and ye lodged me.
 i was naked ye clothed me.
 i was sicke and ye vysited me.
 i was in preson and ye came vnto me.
 then shal the righteous answere him saye.
 lorde whe sawe we the hogrie and fed the.
 or thirstie and gaue the drynke.
 when sawe we the herbourlesse and lodged the.
 or naked and clothed ye.
 or whe sawe we ye sicke or in preson and came vnto the.
 and the kynge shal answer and saye vnto them.
 verely i saye vnto you.
 loke what ye haue done vnto one of the least of these my brethren the same haue ye done vnto me.
 then shal he saye also vnto them that shalbe on the left hande.
 departe fro me ye cursed in to the euerlastinge fyre which is prepared for the deuell and his angels.
 for i was hogrie and ye gaue me no meate.
 i was thirstye and ye gaue me no drynke.
 i was herbourlesse and ye lodged me not.
 i was naked and ye clothed me not.
 i was sicke and in preson and ye vysited me not.
 then shal they also answere hi and saye.
 lorde when sawe we the hogrie or thyrstie or herbourlesse or naked or sicke or in preson and haue not mynistred vnto the.
 the shal he answere them and saye.
 verely i saye vnto you.
 loke what ye haue not done vnto one of the leest of these the same haue ye not done vnto me.
 and these shal go in to euerlastinge payne but the righteous in to euerlastinge life.
 and it came to passe wha iesus had fynished all these wordes he sayde vnto his disciples.
 ye knowe that after two dayes shalbe easter and the sonne of man shalbe delyuered to be crucified.
 then assembled together the hye prestes and the scrybes and the elders of the people in to the palace of the hye prest which was called caiphas and helde a councell how they might take iesus by disceate and kyll him.
 but they sayde.
 not on the holy daye lest there be an vproure in the people.
 now when iesus was at bethany in the house of symon the leper there came vnto hi a woman which had a boxe with precious oyntment and poured it vpon his heade as he sat at the table.
 whan his disciples sawe that they dissdayned and sayde.
 where to serueth this waist.
 this oyntmet might haue bene wel solde and geue to the poore.
 whe iesus perceaued that he sayde vnto them.
 why trouble ye the woman.
 she hath wrought a good worke vpon me for ye haue allwaye the poore with you but me shal ye not haue allwayes.
 where as she hath poured this oyntmet vpon my body she dyd it to bury me.
 verely i saye vnto you.
 where so euer this gospell shalbe preached thorow out all the worlde there shal this also that she hath done be tolde for a memoriall of her.
 then one of the twolue called iudas iscarioth wente vnto the hye prestes and sayde.
 what wil ye geue me and i shal delyuer him vnto you.
 and they offred hi thirtie syluer pens.
 and from that tyme forth he sought oportunyte to betraye him.
 the first daye of swete bred came the disciples to iesus and sayde vnto him.
 where wilt thou that we prepare for the to eate the easter lambe.
 he sayde.
 go in to the cite to soch a man and saye vnto him.
 the master sendeth the worde.
 my tyme is at honde i wil kepe myne easter by the with my disciples.
 and the disciples dyd as iesus had appoynted them and made ready the easter lambe.
 and at euen he sat downe at the table with the twolue.
 and as they ate he sayde.
 verely i saye vnto you.
 one of you shal betraye me.
 and they were exceadinge soroufull and beganne euery one of them to saye vnto him.
 syr is it i.
 he answered and sayde.
 he that deppeth his honde with me in the dysshe the same shal betraye me.
 the sonne of man goeth forth as it is wrytten of him.
 but wo vnto that man by who the sonne of man shalbe betrayed.
 it had bene better for that ma yf he had neuer bene borne.
 the iudas that betrayed him answered and sayde.
 master is it i.
 he sayde vnto.
 him thou hast sayde.
 and as they ate iesus toke the bred gaue thankes brake it and gaue it to the disciples and sayde.
 take eate this is my body.
 and he toke the cuppe and thanked and gaue it the and sayde.
 drynke ye all therof this is my bloude of the new testament that shalbe shed for many for the remission of synnes.
 i saye vnto you.
 i wil not drynke hence forth of this frute of the vyne tre vntill that daye that i shal drynke it new with you in my fathers kyngdome.
 and whan they had sayde grace they wente forth vnto mount oliuete.
 then sayde iesus vnto them.
 this night shal ye all be offended in me.
 for it is wrytten.
 i wil smyte the shepherde and the shepe of the flocke shalbe scatered abrode.
 but after that i ryse agayne i wil go before you in to galile.
 peter answered and sayde vnto him.
 though all men shulde be offended in ye yet wyl i neuer be offeded.
 iesus sayde vnto hi.
 verely i saye vnto ye.
 this same night before ye cock crowe shalt thou denie me thryse.
 peter saide vnto him.
 and though i shulde dye with the yet wil i not denye the.
 likewyse also sayde all the disciples.
 then came iesus with them into a felde which is called gethsemane and sayde vnto the disciples.
 syt ye here whyle i go yonder praye.
 and he toke with him peter and the two sonnes of zebede and beganne to wexe soroufull and to be in an agonye.
 then sayde iesus vnto them.
 my soule is heuy euen vnto the death.
 tary ye here and watch with me.
 and he wente forth a litle and fell flat vpon his face and prayed sayenge.
 o my father yf it be possible let this cuppe passe fro me.
 neuertheles not as i wil but as thou wilt.
 and he came to his disciples and founde the a slepe sayde vnto peter.
 what.
 coude ye not watch with me one houre.
 watch praye that ye fall not in to temptacion.
 the sprete is wyllinge but the flesh is weake.
 agayne he wete forth the seconde tyme and prayed sayenge.
 o my father yf this cuppe can not passe awaye fro me excepte i drynke of it thy will be fulfilled.
 and he came and founde them a slepe agayne and their eyes were heuy.
 and he left them and wente forth agayne and prayed the thirde tyme sayenge the same wordes.
 then came he to his disciples and sayde vnto them.
 slepe on now and take youre rest.
 beholde the houre is come yt the sonne of man shalbe delyuered in to the hondes of synners.
 aryse let us be goynge.
 beholde he is at hode that betrayeth me.
 whyle he yet spake lo iudas one of the twolue came and with him a greate multitude with swerdes and staues sent fro the hye prestes and elders of the people.
 and he that betrayed him had geuen them a toke sayenge.
 whom so euer i kysse that same is he laye hodes vpo him.
 and forth withal he came to iesus and sayde.
 hayle master and kyssed him.
 and iesus sayde vnto him.
 frende wherfore art thou come.
 then came they and layed hondes vpon iesus and toke him.
 and beholde one of them that were with iesus stretched out his honde and drue his swerde and stroke a seruaunt of the hye prestes smote of his eare.
 then sayde iesus vnto him.
 put vp yi swerde in to his place.
 for all that take the swerde shal perish with the swerde.
 or thinkest thou that i can not praye my father now to sende me more then twolue legions of angels.
 but how the shulde the scriptures be fulfylled.
 for thus must it be.
 in the same houre sayde iesus vnto the multitude.
 ye are come out as it were to a murthurer with swerdes and staues for to take me.
 i sat daylie teachinge in the temple amonge you and ye toke me not.
 but all this is done that the scriptures of the prophetes might be fulfylled.
 the all the disciples left him and fled.
 but they that toke iesus led him to caiphas the hye prest where the scrybes and the elders were gathered together.
 as for peter he folowed him a farre of vnto the hye prestes palace wente in and sat with the seruauntes that he might se the ende.
 but the hye prestes and the elders and the whole councell sought false wytnesse ageynst iesus that they might put him to death and founde none.
 and though many false wytnesses stepte forth yet founde they none.
 at the last there stepte forth two false wytnesses spake.
 he sayde.
 i can breake downe the temple of god and buylde it agayne in thre dayes.
 and the hye prest stode vp and sayde vnto him.
 answerest thou nothinge vnto it that these testifie agaynst the.
 neuertheles iesus helde his tonge.
 and the hye prest answered and sayde vnto him.
 i charge the by ye lyuynge god that thou tell us yf thou be christ the sonne of god.
 iesus spake.
 thou hast sayde it.
 neuerthelesse i saye vnto you.
 from this tyme forth it shal come to passe that ye shal se the sonne of man syttinge vpon the right hande of the power of god and commynge in the cloudes of the heauen.
 then the hye prest rente his clothes and sayde.
 he hath blasphemed what nede we eny mo wytnesses.
 lo now haue ye herde his blasphemy.
 what thinke ye.
 they answered sayde.
 he is gyltie of death.
 then spytted they in his face smote him with fistes.
 some smote him vpon the face and sayde.
 prophecie vnto us thou christ who is it that smote the.
 as for peter he sat without in the palace.
 and there came vnto him a damsell and sayde.
 and thou wast with iesus of galile also.
 neuertheles he denyed before the all and sayde.
 i can not tell what thou sayest.
 but whan he wete out at the dore another damsell sawe him.
 and sayde vnto them that were there.
 this was also with iesus of nazareth.
 and he denyed agayne and sware also.
 i knowe not the ma.
 and after a litle whyle they that stode there stepte forth and sayde vnto peter.
 of a trueth thou art one of them also for thy speach bewrayeth the.
 then begane he to curse and to sweare.
 i knowe not the man.
 and immediatly the cock crew.
 then thought peter vpon the wordes of iesus which sayde vnto him.
 before the cock crow thou shalt denye me thryse.
 and he wente out and wepte bytterly.
 vpon the morow all the hye prestes and elders of the people helde a councell agaynst iesus that they might put him to death and bounde him and led him forth and delyuered him vnto pontius pilate the debyte.
 when iudas which betrayed him sawe this that he was condemned vnto death it repented him and brought agayne the thirtie syluer pens to the hye prestes and the elders and sayde.
 i haue done euell in that i haue betrayed innocet bloude.
 they sayde.
 what haue we to do with yt.
 se thou therto.
 and he cast the syluer pens in the teple and gat him awaye and wente and hanged him self.
 so the hye prestes toke the syluer pens and sayde.
 it is not laufull to put them in to the gods chest for it is bloudmoney.
 neuertheles they helde a councell and bought with the a potters felde for to burye straugers in.
 wherfore the same felde is called the bloudfelde vnto this daye.
 then was that fulfylled which was spoken by ieremy the prophet sayenge.
 and they toke thirtie syluer pens the pryce of him that was solde whom they bought of the children of israell.
 and these they gaue for a potters felde as the lorde commaunded me.
 as for iesus he stode before the debyte and the debyte axed him and sayde.
 art thou the kynge of the iewes.
 and iesus sayde vnto him.
 thou sayest it.
 and wha he was accused of the hye prestes and elders he answered nothinge.
 then sayde pylate vnto him.
 hearest thou not how sore they accuse the.
 and he answered him not one worde.
 in so moch that the debyte marueled exceadingly.
 at that feast the debyte was wote to delyuer a presoner fre vnto the people whom they wolde.
 and at the same tyme he had a notable presoner called barrabas.
 and whan they were gathered together pylate sayde vnto them.
 whether wil ye that i geue lowse vnto you.
 barrabas or iesus which is called christ.
 for he knewe well that they had delyuered him of enuye.
 and wha he sat vpo the iudgmet seate his wife sent vnto him sayenge.
 haue thou nothinge to do with that righteous man for i haue suffred many thinges this daye in a dreame because of him.
 but the hye prestes and the elders persuaded the people that they shulde axe barrabas and destroye iesus.
 then answered the debyte sayde vnto the.
 whether of these two wyl ye yt i geue lowse vnto you.
 they sayde.
 barrabas.
 pylate sayde vnto them.
 what shal i do then with iesus which is called christ.
 they sayde all.
 let him be crucified.
 the debyte saide.
 what euell hath he done the.
 neuertheles they cried yet more and sayde let him be crucified.
 so whan pilate sawe that he coude not helpe but that there was a greater vproure he toke water and wasshed his handes before the people and sayde.
 i am vngiltie of ye bloude of this righteous man.
 se ye therto.
 then answered all the people and sayde.
 his bloude come vpon vs and vpon oure children.
 then gaue he barrabas lowse vnto the but caused iesus be scourged and delyuered him to be crucified.
 then the debites soudyers toke iesus in to the comon hall and gathered the whole multitude ouer him and stryped him out of his clothes and put a purple robe vpo him and plated a crowne of thorne set it vpon his heade and a rede in his hade and kneled before him and mocked him and sayde.
 hayle kynge of the iewes.
 and spytted vpon him and toke ye rede smote him vpon the heade.
 and wha they had mocked hi they toke the robe of him ageyne put his owne clothes vpon him and led him forth yt they might crucifie hi.
 and as they were goinge out they founde a man of cyren called symon.
 him they compelled to beare his crosse.
 and when they came vnto the place called golgatha that is to saye by interpretacio a place of deed mens sculles they gaue him to drynke veneger myxte wt gall.
 and whan he had tasted therof he wolde not drynke.
 so whan they had crucified him they parted his garmetes and cast lottes therfore.
 that the thinge might be fulfilled which was spoken by the prophet.
 they haue parted my garmetes amonge the cast lottes vpon my vesture.
 and there they sat and watched hi.
 and aboue ouer his heade they put vp the cause of his death in wrytinge.
 namely.
 this is the kynge of the iewes.
 then were there two murthurers crucified with him the one of the right hande and the other on the left.
 they that wente by reuyled him and wagged their heades and sayde.
 thou that breakest downe the teple of god and buyldest it in thre dayes helpe thyself.
 yf thou be the sonne of god come downe from the crosse.
 the hye prestes also in like maner with the scrybes elders laughed him to scorne and sayde.
 he hath helped other and can not helpe himself.
 yf he be the kynge of israel let him come downe now from the crosse and we wil beleue him he trusted in god let him delyuer him now yf he wil haue him.
 for he hath sayde.
 i am the sonne of god.
 the murtherers also that were crucified with him cast the same in his tethe.
 and from ye sixte houre there was darcknes ouer the whole earth vnto the nyenth houre.
 and aboute the nyenth houre iesus cried with a loude voyce and sayde.
 eli eli lamma asabthani.
 that is my god my god why hast thou forsaken me.
 but some of the that stode there when they herde yt sayde.
 he calleth elias.
 and immediatly one of them ranne and toke a spoge and fylled it with veneger and put it vpon a rede and gaue him to dryncke.
 but ye other sayde.
 holde let se whether elias wyl come and delyuer him.
 iesus cried agayne with a loude voyce and gaue vp the goost.
 and beholde the vale of the temple was rente in two peces from aboue tyll beneth and the earth quaked and the stones rent and the graues opened and many bodies of the sayntes that slepte arose and wete out of the graues after his resurreccion and came in to the holy cite and appeared vnto many.
 but the captayne and they that were with him and kepte iesus when they sawe the earthquake and the thinges that were done they were sore afrayed and sayde.
 verely this was gods sonne.
 and there were many wemen there lokynge to afarre of which had folowed iesus from galile and had mynistred vnto him.
 amonge whom was mary magdalene and mary the mother of iames and ioses and the mother of the children of zebede.
 at euen there came a rich man of arimathia called ioseph which was also a disciple of iesus.
 he wete vnto pylate and axed the body of iesus.
 then commaunded pylate that the body shulde be geue him.
 and ioseph toke the body and wrapped it in a cleane lynnen cloth and layed it in his owne new sepulcre which he had hewen out in a rocke and rolled a greate stone to the dore of the sepulcre and wente his waye.
 and there was mary magdalene and ye other mary syttinge ouer agaynst the sepulcre.
 the next daye that foloweth the daye of preparynge the hye prestes and pharises came together vnto pylate and saide.
 syr we haue called to remembraunce that this disceauer sayde whyle he was yet alyue.
 after thre dayes i wyl ryse agayne.
 comaunde therfore that the sepulcre be kepte vnto the thirde daye lest peraduenture his disciples come and steale him awaye and saye vnto the people.
 he is rysen from the deed and so shal the last errour be worse the the first.
 pylate sayde vnto them.
 there haue ye watchme go youre waye and kepe it as ye can.
 they wete and kepte the sepulcre wt watchmen and sealed the stone.
 upon the euenynge of the sabbath holy daye which dawneth ye morow of the first daye of ye sabbathes came mary magdalene and ye other mary to se ye sepulcre.
 and beholde there was made a greate earthquake.
 for the angell of the lorde descended from heauen and came and rolled backe ye stone from the dore and sat vpon it.
 and his countenaunce was as ye lightenynge and his clothinge whyte as snowe.
 but ye watch me were troubled for feare of him and became as though they were deed.
 the angell answered and sayde vnto ye women.
 be not ye afrayed.
 i knowe that ye seke iesus that was crucified.
 he is not here.
 he is rysen as he sayde.
 come and se ye place where the lorde was layed and go youre waye soone and tell his disciples that he is rysen from the deed.
 and beholde he wyl go before you in to galile there shal ye se him.
 lo i haue tolde you.
 and they departed from the graue in all the haist with feare and greate ioye ranne to brige his disciples worde.
 and as they were goinge to tell his disciples beholde iesus met them and sayde.
 god spede you.
 and they wente vnto him and helde his fete and fell downe before him.
 the sayde iesus vnto them.
 be not afrayed.
 go youre waye and tell my brethren that they go in to galile there shal they se me.
 and whan they were gone beholde certayne of the watchmen came in to the cite tolde the hye prestes euery thinge that had happened.
 and they came together with the elders and helde a councell and gaue ye souders money ynough and sayde.
 saye ye.
 his disciples came by night and stole him awaye whyle we were a slepe.
 and yf this come to the debytes eares we wyl styll him and brynge it so to passe that ye shal be safe.
 and they toke the money and dyd as they were taught.
 and this sayenge is noysed amonge the iewes vnto this daye.
 the eleuen disciples wente vnto galile in to a mountayne where iesus had appoynted them.
 and whan they sawe him they fell downe before him.
 but some of them douted.
 and iesus came vnto them talked with them and sayde.
 vnto me is geue all power in heauen and in earth.
 go ye youre waye therfore and teach all nacions and baptyse them in the name of the father and of the sonne and of the holy goost.
 and teach them to kepe all thinges what soeuer i haue commaunded you.
 and lo i am with you euery daye vnto the ende of the worlde.
 