the booke of the generacion of iesus christ the sonne of dauid the sonne of abraham.
 abraham begate isaac.
 and isaac begate iacob.
 and iacob begate iudas and his brethren.
 and iudas begate phares and zara of thamar.
 and phares begate esrom.
 and esrom begate aram.
 and aram begate aminadab.
 and aminadab begate naasson.
 and naasson begate salmon.
 and salmon begate booz of rachab.
 and booz begate obed of ruth.
 and obed begate iesse.
 and iesse begate dauid the king.
 and dauid the king begate solomon of her that was the wife of vrias.
 andsolomon begate roboam.
 and begate abia.
 and abia begate asa.
 and asa begate iosaphat.
 and iosaphat begate ioram.
 and ioram begate ozias.
 and ozias begate ioatham.
 and ioatham begate achaz.
 and achaz begate ezecias.
 and ezecias begate manasses.
 and manasses begate amon.
 and amon begate iosias.
 and iosias begate iacim.
 and iacim begate iechonias and his brethren about the tyme they were caryed away to babylon.
 and after they were caryed away into babylon iechonias begate salathiel.
 and salathiel begate zorobabel.
 and zorobabel begate abiud.
 and abiud begate eliacim.
 and eliacim begate azor.
 and azor begate sadoc.
 and sadoc begate achim.
 and achim begate eliud.
 and eliud begate eleazar.
 and eleazar begate matthan.
 and matthan begate iacob.
 and iacob begate ioseph the housband of marie of whome was borne iesus that is called christ.
 so al the generations from abraham to dauid are fourtene generations.
 and from dauid vntil they were caryed away into babylon fourtene generacions.
 and after they were caryed away into babylon vntil christ fourtene generacions.
 now the byrth of iesus christ was thus when as his mother marie was betrowthed to ioseph before they came together she was founde with childe of the holie gost.
 then ioseph her housband being a iust man and not willing to make her a publike example was minded to put her away secretly.
 but whiles he thoght these things behold the angel of the lord appeared vnto him in a dreame saying ioseph the sonne of dauid feare not to take marie for thy wife.
 for that which is conceiued in her is of the holie gost.
 and she shal bring for the a sonne and thou shalt call his name iesus.
 for he shal saue his people from their sinnes.
 and all this was done that it might be fulfilled which was spoken of the lord by the prophet saying beholde a virgine shalbe with childe and shal beare a sonne and they shal call his name emmanuel which is by interpretacion god with vs.
 then ioseph being raised from slepe did as the angel of the lord had inioyned him and toke his wife.
 but he knewe her not til she had broght forthe her first borne sonne and he called his name iesus.
 when iesus then was borne at bethlehem in iudea in the dayes of herode the king beholde there came wisemen from the east to ierusalem saying where is the king of the iewes that is borne.
 for we haue sene his starre in the east and are come to worship him.
 when king herode heard this he was troubled and all ierusalem with him.
 and gathering together all the chief priests scribes of the people he asked of them where christ shulde be borne.
 and they said vnto him at bethlehem in iudea.
 for so it is written by the prophet and thou bethlehem in the land of iuda art not the least among the princes of iuda.
 for out of thee shal come the gouernour that shal fede my people israel.
 then herode priuely called the wisemen and diligently inquired of them the time of the starre that appeared and sent them to bethlehem saying go searche diligently for the babe.
 and when ye haue founde him bring me worde againe that i may come also and worship him.
 so when they had heard the king they departed.
 lo the starre which they had sene in the east went before them til it came and stode ouer the place where the babe was.
 and when they sawe the starre they reioyced with an exceading great ioye and went into the house and founde the babe with marie his mother and fel downe and worshipped him and opened their treasures and presented vnto him giftes euen golde and incense and myrrhe.
 and after they were warned of god in a dreame that they shulde not go againe to herode they returned into their countrey another way.
 after their departure beholde the angel of the lord appeareth to ioseph in a dreame saying arise and take the babe and his mother and flee into egypt and be there til i bring thee worde.
 for herode wil seke the babe to destroye him.
 so he arose and toke the babe and his mother by night and departed into egypt and was there vnto the death of herode that it might be fulfilled which was spoken of the lord by the prophet saying out of egypt haue i called my sonne.
 then herode seing that he was mocked of the wisemen was exceading wroth and sent forthe and slewe all the male children that were in bethlehem and in all the coastes thereof from two yere olde and vnder according to the time which he had diligently searched out of the wisemen.
 then was that fulfilled which was spoken by the prophet ieremias saying in rama was a voyce heard mourning and weping and great lamentation.
 rachel weping for her children and wolde not be comforted because they were not.
 and when herode was dead beholde an angel of the lord appeareth in a dreame to ioseph in egypt saying arise and take the babe and his mother and go into the land of israel.
 for they are dead which soght the babes life.
 then he arose vp and toke the babe and his mother and came into the land of israel.
 but when he heard that archelaus did reigne in iudea in steade of his father herode he was afrayed to gothether.
 yet after he was warned of god in a dreame he turned aside into the parties of galile.
 and went and dwelt in a citie called nazaret that it might be fulfilled which was spoken by the prophetes which was that he shulde be called a nazarite.
 and in those dayes iohn the baptiste came and preached in the wildernes of iudea and said repent.
 for the kingdome of heauen is at hand.
 for this is he of whome it is spoken by the prophet esaias saying the voyce of him that cryeth in the wildernes is prepare ye the way of the lord.
 make his paths straight.
 and this iohn had his garment of camels heere and a gridle of a skin about his loynes.
 his meat was also locustes wilde honie.
 then went out to him ierusalem all iudea and all the region rounde about iordan.
 and they were baptized of him in iordan confessing their sinnes.
 now when he sawe many of the pharises and of the sadduces come to his baptisme he said vnto them o generacions of vipers who hathe forewarned you to flee from the angre to come.
 bring for the therefore frutes worthie amendement of life and thinke not to say with your selues.
 we haue abraham to our father.
 for i say vnto you that god is able of these stones to raise vp children vnto abraham.
 and now also is the axe put to the roote of the trees.
 therefore euerie tre whiche bringeth not forthe good frute is hewen downe and cast into the fyre.
 in dede i baptize you with water to amendement of life but he that cometh after me is mightier then i whose shoes i am not worthie to beare.
 he wil baptize you with the holie gost and with fyre.
 which hathe his fanne in his hand and wil make cleane his floore and gather his wheat into his garner but wil burne vp the chaffe with vnquencheable fyre.
 then came iesus from galile to iordan vnto iohn to be baptized of him.
 but iohn put him backe saying i haue nede to be baptized of thee and commest thou to me.
 then iesus answering said to him let be now.
 for thus it becometh vs to fulfil all righteousnes.
 so he suffred him.
 and iesus when he was baptized came straight out of the water.
 and lo the heauens were opened vnto him and iohn sawe the spirit of god descending like a doue and lighting vpon him.
 and lo a voyce came from heauen saying this is my beloued sonne in whome i am wel pleased.
 then was iesus led aside of the spirit into the wildernes to be tempted of the deuil.
 and when he had fasted fortie dayes and fortie nights he was afterwarde hungrie.
 then came to him the tempter and said if thou be the sonne of god that these stones be made bread.
 but he answering said it is written man shal not liue by bread onely but by euerie worde that proceadeth out of the mouth of god.
 then the deuil toke him vp into the holie citie and set him on a pinacle of the temple and said vnto him if thou be the sonne of god cast thy self downe.
 for it is written that he wil giue his angels charge ouer thee and with their hands they shal lifte thee vp left at anie time thou shuldest dash thy fote against a stone.
 iesus said vnto him it is written againe thou shalt not tempt the lord thy god.
 againe the deuil toke him vp vnto an exceading hie mountaine and shewed him all the kingdomes of the worlde and the glorie of them and said to him all these wil i giue thee if thou wilt fall downe and worship me.
 then said iesus vnto him auoide satan for it is written thou shalt worship the lord thy god and him onely shalt thou serue.
 then the deuil left him.
 and beholde the angels came.
 and ministred vnto him.
 .
 and when iesus had heard that iohn was deliuered vp he returned into galile and leauing nazaret went and dwelt in capernaum which is nere the sea in the borders of zabulon and nephthalim that it might be fulfilled which was spoken by esaias the prophet saying the land of zabulon and the land of nephthalim by the way of the sea beyond iordan galile of the gentiles.
 the people which sate in darkenes sawe great light.
 and to them which sate in the region and shadowe of death light is risen vp.
 from that time iesus began to preache and to say amend your liues.
 for the kingdome of heauen is at hand.
 and iesus walking by the sea of galile sawe two brethren simon which was called peter and andrew his brother casting a net into the sea for they were fishers.
 and he said vnto them folowe me and i wil make you fishers of men.
 and they straight way leauing the nets followed him.
 and when he was gone for the from thence he sawe other two brethren iames the sonne of zebedeus and iohn his brother in a ship with zebedeus their father mending their nets and he called them.
 and they without tarying leauing the ship and their father followed him.
 so iesus went about all galile teaching in their synagogues and preaching the gospel of the kingdome and healing euerie sickenes and euerie disease among the people.
 and his same spred abroad through all syria and they broght vnto him all sicke people that were taken with diuers diseases and gripings and them that were possessed with deuils and those which were lunatike and those that had the palsey.
 and he healed them.
 and there folowed him great multitudes out of galile.
 and decapolis and ierusalem and iudea and from beyonde iordan.
 and when he sawe the multitude he went vp into a mountaine.
 and when he was set his disciples came to him.
 and he opened his mouthe and taught them saying blessed are the poore in spirit for theirs is the kingdome of heauen.
 blessed are they that mourne.
 for they shalbe comforted.
 blessed are the meke.
 for they shal inherit the earth.
 blessed are they which honger and thirst for righteousnes.
 for they shal be filled.
 blessed are the merciful.
 for thei shal obteine mercie.
 blessed are the pure in heart.
 for they shal se god.
 blessed are the place makers.
 for they shalbe called the children of god.
 blessed are they which suffer persecution for righteousnes sake.
 for theirs is the kingdome of heauen.
 blessed are ye when men reuile you and persecute you and say all maner of euil against you for my sake falsely.
 reioyce be glad for great is your rewarde in heauen.
 for so persecuted they the prophets which were before you.
 ye are the salte of the earth.
 but if the salt haue lost his fauour where with shal it be salted.
 it is thence forthe good for nothing but to be cast out and to be troden vnder fote of men ye are the light of the worlde.
 a citie that is set on an hill can not be hid.
 nether do men light a candel and put it vnder a bushel but on a candelsticke and it giueth light vnto all that are in the house.
 let your light so shine before men that they may se your good workes and glorifie your father which is in heauen.
 thinke not that i am come to destroye the law or the prophetes.
 i am not come to destroye them but to fulfil them.
 fortruely i say vnto you til heauen and earth perish one iote or one title of the law shal not scape til all things be fulfilled.
 whosoeuer therefore shal breake one of these least commandements teache men so he shalbe called the least in the kingdome of heauen.
 but whosoeuer shal obserue and teache them the same shal be called great in the kingdome of heauen.
 for i say vnto you except your righteousnes excede the righteousnes of the scribes and pharises ye shal not enter into the kingdome of heauen.
 ye haue heard that it was said vnto them of the olde time thou shalt not kil.
 for whosoeuer killeth shalbe culpable of iudgement.
 but i say vnto you whosoeuer is angrie with his brother vnaduisedly shal be culpable of iudgement.
 and whosoeuer saieth vnto his brother raca shalbe worthie to be punished with by the counsel.
 and whosoeuer shal say foole shalbe worthie to be punished with hel fyre.
 if then thou bring thy gift to the altar and there remembrest that thy brother hathe oght against thee leaue there thine offring before the altar and go thy way.
 first be reconciled to thy brother and then come and offer thy gift.
 agre with thine aduersarie quickely whiles thou art in the way with him lest thine aduersarie deliuer thee to the iudge and the iudge deliuer thee to the sergeant and thou be cast into prison.
 verely i say vnto thee thou shalt not come out thence til thou hast payed the vtmost farthing.
 ye haue heard that it was said to them of olde time thou shalt not commit adulterie.
 but i say vnto you that whosoeuer loketh on a woman to lust after her hathe committed adulterie with her already in his heart.
 wherefore if thy right eye cause thee to offend plucke it out and cast it from thee.
 for better it is for thee that one of thy members perish them that thy whole bodie shulde be cast into hel.
 also if thy right hand make thee to offend cut it of and cast it from thee.
 for better it is for thee that one of thy members perish them that thy whole bodie shulde be cast into hel it hathe bene said also whosoeuer shal put away his wife let him giue her a testimonial of diuorcement.
 but i say vnto you whosoeuer shal put away his wife except it be for fornication causeth her to commit adulterie.
 whosoeuer shal marie her that is diuorced committeth adulterie.
 againe ye haue heard that it was said to them of olde time thou shalt not forsweare thy self but shalt performe thine others to the lord.
 but i say vnto you sweare not at all nether by heauen for it is the throne of god.
 nor yet by the earth.
 for it is his fote stoole.
 nether by ierusalem.
 for it is the citie of the great king.
 nether shalt thou sweare by thine head because thou canst not make one heere white or blacke.
 but let your communication be yea.
 yea.
 nay nay.
 for whatsoeuer is more then these commeth of euil.
 ye haue heard that it hathe bene said an eye for an eye and a tooth for a tooth.
 but i saye vnto you resiste not euil.
 but whosoeuer shall smite thee on thy ryght cheke turne to him the other also.
 and if anye man will sue thee at the lawe and take awaye thy coate let him haue thy cloke also.
 and whosoeuer will compell thee to go a mile go with him twaine.
 giue to him that asketh and from him that wolde borow of thee turne not away.
 ye haue heard that it hathe bene sayde thou shalt loue thy neighbour and hate thine enemie.
 but i say vnto you loue your enemies.
 blesse them that curse you.
 do good to them that hate you and praye for them which hurt you and you.
 that ye may be the children of your father that is in heauen.
 for he maketh his sunne to arise on the euill and the good and sendeth raine on the iuste and vniuste.
 for if ye loue them which loue you what rewarde shall you haue.
 do not the publicanes euen the same.
 and if ye be friendlie to your brethren onely what singular thing do ye.
 do not euen the publicanes like wise.
 ye shal therfore be perfite as your father which is in heauen is perfite.
 take hede that ye gyue not your almes before men to be sene of them or elsye shall haue no rewarde of your father which is in heauen.
 therefore when thou giuest thyne almes thou shalt not make a trumpet to be blowen before thee as the hypocrites do in the synagogues and in the stretes to be praysed of men.
 verely i saye vnto you they haue their rewarde.
 but when thou doest thyne almes let not thy left hande knowe what thy ryght hand doeth.
 that thyne almesmay be in secret and thy father that seeth in secret he will rewarde thee openly.
 and when thou prayest be not as the hypocrites.
 for they loue to stand and pray in the synagogues in the corners of the stretes because they wolde be sene of men.
 verely i say vnto you they haue their rewarde.
 but when thou prayest enter into thy chamber.
 and when thou hast shut thy dore pray vnto thy father whiche is in secret and thy father whiche seeth in secret shall rewarde thee openly.
 also when ye pray vse no vaine repetitions as the heathen.
 for they thinke to be heard for their muche babling.
 be ye not like them therefore.
 for your father knoweth whereof ye haue nede before ye aske of him.
 after this maner therefore pray ye our father whiche art in heauen halowed be thy name.
 thy kingdome come.
 thy wil be done euen in earth as it is in heauen.
 giue vs this day our daily bread.
 and forgiue vs our dettes as we also forgiue our detters.
 and lead vs not into tentation but deliuer vs from euill.
 for thyne is the kyngdome and the power and the glorie for .
 amen.
 forifye do forgiue men their trespaces your heauenlie father wil also forgiue you.
 but if ye do not forgiue men their trespaces no more wil your father forgiue you your trespaces.
 moreouer when ye fast loke not sowre as the hypocrites.
 for they diffigure their faces that they myght seme vnto men to fast.
 verely i say vnto you that they haue theyr rewarde.
 but when thou fastest anoint thine head and wash thy face.
 that thou seme not vnto men to fast but vnto thy father whiche is in secret.
 and thy father which seeth in secret will rewarde thee openly.
 lay not treasures for your selues vpon the earth where the mothe and canker corrupt and where theues digge through and steale.
 but lay vp treasures for your selues in heauen where nether the mothe nor canker corrupteth and where theues nether digge through nor steale.
 for where your treasure is there will your heart be also.
 the light of the bodie is the eye.
 if then thine eye be single thy whole bodie shall be light.
 but if thyne eye be wicked then all thy bodie shalbe darke.
 wherefore if the light that is in thee be darkenes howe greate is that darkenes.
 no man can serue two masters.
 for either he shall hate the one and loue the other or els he shall leane to the one and despise the other.
 ye can not serue god and riches.
 therfore i say vnto you be not carefull for your life what ye shall eat or what ye shall drinke.
 nor yet for your bodie what ye shall put on.
 is not the life more wroth then meat.
 and the bodie then raiment.
 beholde the foules of the heauen.
 for they so we not neither reape not carie into the barnes.
 yet your heauenlie father fedeth them.
 are ye not muche better then they.
 whiche of you by takyng care is able to adde one cubit vnto his stature.
 and why care ye for raiment.
 learne how the lilies of the field do grow.
 they labour not nether spinne.
 yet i say vnto you that euen solomon in al his glorie was not arayed like one of these.
 wherefore if god so clothe the grasse of the field which is to day and tomorowe is cast into the ouen shall he not do muche more vnto you ye of litle faith.
 therfore take no thoght saying what shal we eat.
 or what shal we drinke.
 or wherwith shal we be clothed.
 for after all these things seke the gentiles for your heauenlie father knoweth that ye haue nede of all these things.
 but seke ye first the kingdome of god and his righteousnes and al these things shalbe ministred vnto you.
 care not then for the morowe.
 for the morowe shall care for it selfe.
 the day hathe ynough with his owne grief.
 ivdge not that ye be not iudged.
 for with what iudgement ye iudge ye shal be iudged and with what measure ye mette it shall be measured to you againe.
 and why seest thou the mote that is in thy brothers eye and perceiuest not the beame that is in thine owne eye.
 or howe saist thou to thy brother suffer me to cast out the mote out of thine eye and beholde a beame is in thine owne eye.
 hypocrite firste cast out the beame out of thine owne eye and then shalt thou se clearely to caste out the mote out of thy brothers eye.
 giue ye not that which is holie to dogges nether caste ye your pearles before swine lest they treade them vnder their fete and turning againe all to rent you.
 aske and it shalbe giuen you.
 seke and ye shal finde.
 knocke and it shalbe opened vnto you.
 for whosoeuer asketh receyueth.
 and he that seeketh findeth.
 and to hym that knocketh it shalbe opened.
 for what man is there among you which if his sonne aske hym bread wolde gyue hym a stone.
 or if he aske fish wil he giue him a serpent.
 if ye then which are euill can giue to your children good giftes how muche more shal your father which is in heauen giue good things to them that aske him.
 therefore whatsoeuer ye wolde that men shulde do to you euen so do ye to them.
 for this is the law and the prophetes.
 enter in at the streicte gate.
 for it is the wide gate and broad way that leadeth to destruction.
 and manie there be which go in thereat.
 because the gate is streicte and the way narowe that leadeth vnto life and fewe there be that finde it.
 be ware of false prophetes which come to you in sheps clothing but inwardly they are rauening wolues.
 ye shall knowe them by their frutes.
 do men gather grapes of thornes.
 or figges of thystels.
 so euery good tre bringeth forth good frute and a corrupt tre bringeth forth euil frute.
 a good tre can not bring forthe euill frute.
 nether can a corrupt tre bryng forthe good frute.
 euerie tre that bringeth not forthe good frute is hewen down and cast into the fyre.
 therefore by their frutes ye shal know them.
 not euerye one that sayeth vnto me lord lord shal enter into the kingdome of heauen but he that doeth my fathers will which is in heauen manie will say to me in that day lorde lorde haue we not by thy name prophecied.
 and by thy name cast out deuils.
 and by thy name done manie great workes.
 and then wil i professe to them i neuer knewe you.
 depart from me ye that worke iniquitie.
 whosoeuer then heareth of me these wordes and doeth the same i wil liken him to a man which hathe builded his house on a rocke.
 and the raine fell and the floods came and the windes blewe and beat vpon that house and it fell not.
 for it was grounded on a rocke.
 but whosoeuer heareth these my wordes and doeth them not shalbe lickned vnto a foolishe man which hathe buylded his house vpon the sand.
 and the raine fell and the floods came and the windes blewe and beat vpon that house and it fell and the fall thereof was great.
 and it came to passe when iesus had ended these wordes the people were astonied at his doctrine.
 for he taught them as one hauing autoritie and not as the scribes.
 nowe when he was come downe frome the mountaine greate multitudes followed him.
 and lo there came a leaper and worshipped hym saying master if thou wilt thou canst make me cleane.
 and iesus putting forthe his hand touched him saying i will be thou cleane.
 and immediatly his leprosie was clensed.
 then iesus said vnto hym se thou tell no man but go and shewe thy selfe vnto the priest and offer the gift that moyses commanded for a witnes to them.
 when iesus was entred into capernaum there came vnto hym a centurion beseching him.
 and said master my seruant lieth sicke at home of the palsie and is grieuously pained and iesus sayd vnto hym i will come and heale hym.
 but the centurion answered saying master i am not worthie that shuldest come vnder my rofe.
 but speake the worde onely and my seruant shalbe healed.
 for i am a man also vnder the autoritie of another and haue souldiers vnder me.
 and i say to one go.
 and he goeth and to another come.
 and he cometh.
 and to my seruant do this.
 and he doeth it.
 when iesus heard that he marueiled and said to them that followed hym verely i say vnto you i haue not founde so greate faith euen in israel.
 but i say vnto you that manie shall come from the east and west and shall sit downe with abraham and isaac and iacob in the kingdome of heauen.
 and the children of the kyngdome shalbe cast out into vtter darkenes.
 there shalbe weping and gnashing of teeth.
 then iesus said vnto the centurion go thy way and as thou hast beleued so be it vnto thee.
 and his seruant was healed the same houre.
 and when iesus came to peters house he sawe his wiues mother laied downe and sicke of a feuer.
 and he touched her hand and the feuer left her.
 so she arose and ministred vnto them.
 when the euen was come they broght vnto him manie that were possessed with deuils.
 and he cast out the spirits with hys worde and healed all that were sicke.
 that it might be fulfilled which was spoken by esaias the prophet saying he toke our infirmities and bare our sickenesses.
 and when iesus sawe great multitudes of people about him he commanded them to go ouer the water.
 then came there a certeine scribe and said vnto him master i will folowe thee whethersoeuer thou goest.
 but iesus said vnto him the foxes haue holes and the birdes of the heauen haue nestes but the sonne of man hathe not whereon to rest his head.
 and another of hys disciples said vnto him master suffer me first to go and burye my father.
 but iesus said vnto hym followe me and let the dead burye their dead.
 and when he was entred into the ship his disciples followed him.
 and beholde there are sea greate tempest in the sea so that the ship was couered with waues.
 but he was a slepe.
 then his disciples came and awoke hym saying master saue vs.
 we perish.
 and he said vnto them why are ye feareful ye oflytle faith.
 then he arose and rebuked the windes and the sea.
 and so there was a great calme.
 and the men marueiled saying what man is thys.
 that bothe the windes and the sea obey him.
 and when he was come to the other side into the countrey of the gergesenes there met hym two possessed wyth deuils which came out of the graues verie fierce so that no man might go by that waye.
 and beholde they cryed out saying iesus the sonne of god what haue we to do with thee.
 art thou come hether to torment vs before the time.
 now there was a farre of from them a great herd of swine feeding.
 and the deuils besoght hym saying if thou caste vs out suffer vs to go into the herd of swine.
 and he sayd vnto them go.
 so they went out and departed into the herd of swine.
 and beholde the whole herd of swine was caryed wyth violence from a downe place in the sea and dyed in the water.
 then the herdmen fled.
 and when they were come into the citie they tolde al things and what was become of them that were possessed with the deuils.
 and beholde all the citie came out to mete iesus.
 and when thei sawe him they besoght him to departe out of their coasts.
 then he entred into a ship and passed ouer and came into his owne citie.
 and lo they broght to hym a man sicke of the palsie lying on a bed.
 and iesus seyng their faith said to the sicke of the palsie sonne be of good comfort.
 thy sinnes are forgiuen thee.
 and beholde certeine of the scribes sayd with them selues this man blasphemeth.
 but when iesus sawe their thoghts he said wherefore thinke ye euill thyngs in your hearts.
 for whether is it easier to say thy sinnes are forgiuing thee or to say arise and walke.
 and that ye may knowe that the sonne of man hathe autoritie in earth to forgiue sinnes then said he vnto the sicke of the palsie arise take vp thy bed and go to thyne house.
 and he arose and departed to hys owne house.
 so when the multitude sawe it they marueiled and glorified god which had giuen such autoritie to men.
 and as iesus passed forthe from thence he saw a man sitting at the receite of custome named matthewe and sayd to him followe me.
 and he arose and followed him.
 and it came to passe as iesus sate at meat in his house beholde manie publicanes and sinners that came thether sate downe at the table with iesus and his disciples.
 and when the pharises sawe that they said to hys disciples why eateth your master with publicanes and sinners.
 now when iesus heard it he sayd vnto them the whole nede not a physicion but they that are sicke.
 but go ye and learne what this is i will haue mercie and not sacrifice.
 for i am not come to call the ryghteous but the sinners to repentance.
 then came the disciples of iohn to him saying why do we and the pharises fast oft and thy disciples fast not.
 and iesus sayd vnto them can the children of the mariage chamber mourne as long as the bridegrome is with them.
 but the dayes wil come when the bridegrome shalbe taken from them and then shal they fast.
 moreouer no man pieceth an olde garment with a piece of newe clothe.
 for that that shulde fil it vp taketh awaye from the garment and the breache is worse.
 nether do they put new wine into olde vessels.
 for then the vessels wolde break and the wine wolde be spilt and the vessels shulde perishe.
 but they put newe wine into newe vessels and so are bothe preserued.
 while he thus spake vnto them beholde there came a certeine ruler and worshipped him saying my daughter is nowe deceased but come and lay thine hand on her and she shal liue.
 and iesus arose and followed him with his disciples.
 and beholde a woman which was diseased with an yssue of bloode twelue yeres came behinde him and touched the hemme of his garment.
 for she said in herself if i may touche but his garment onely i shalbe whole.
 then iesus turned him aboute and seyng her did say daughter be of good comfort.
 thy fayth hathe made thee whole.
 and the woman was made whole at that houre.
 now when iesus came into the rulers house and sawe the minstrels and the multitude making noise.
 he said vnto them get you hense.
 for the maide is not dead but slepeth.
 and they laughed hym to skorne.
 and when the multitude were put forthe he went in and toke her by the hand and the maide arose.
 and this bruite went through out all that land.
 and as iesus departed thence two blinde men followed hym crying and saying.
 o sonne of dauid haue mercie vpon vs.
 and when he was come in the house the blinde came to him and iesus said vnto them beleue ye that i am able to do this.
 and they said vnto him yea lord.
 then touched he their eyes saying according to your faith be it vnto you.
 and their eyes were opened and iesus charged them saying se that no man knowe it.
 but when they were departed they spred abroad his fame throughout all that land.
 and as they wente out beholde they broght to him a domme man possessed with a deuill.
 and when the deuill was caste out the domme spake.
 then the multitude marueiled saying the like was neuer sene in israel.
 but the pharises sayd he casteth out deuils through the prince of deuils.
 and iesus went about all cities and townes teaching in their sinagogues and preachyng the gospell of the kyngdome and healyng euerye sicknes and euerie disease among the people.
 but when he sawe the multitude he had compassion vpon them because they were dispersed and scatered abroad as shepe hauing no shepherde.
 then said he to hys disciples surely the haruest is great but the laborers are fewe.
 wherfore praye the lord of the haruest that he wolde send forthe laborers into his haruest.
 and he called hys twelue disciples vnto him and gaue them power againste vncleane spirits to cast them out and to heale euerie sickenes and euerie disease.
 nowe the names of the twelue apostles are these.
 the firste is simon called peter and andrewe his brother.
 iames the sonne of zebedeus and iohn his brother.
 philippe and bartlemewe.
 thomas and matthewe the publicane.
 iames the sonne of alpheus and lebbeus whose surname was thaddeus.
 simon the cananite and iudas iscariot who also betrayed him.
 these twelue did iesus send forth and commanded them saying go not into the waye of the gentiles and into the cities of the samaritans enter ye not.
 but go rather to the lost shepe of the house of israel.
 and as ye go preach saying the kingdom of heauen is at hand.
 heale the sicke.
 clense the lepers.
 raise vp the dead.
 cast out the deuils.
 frely ye haue receiued frely giue.
 possesse not golde nor siluer nor money in your girdels.
 nor a scrippe for the iorney nether two coates nether shoes nor a staffe.
 for the workeman is worthie of his meat.
 and into whatsoeuer citie or towne ye shal come enquire who is worthie in it and there abide til ye go thence.
 and when ye come into an house salute the same.
 and if the house be worthie let your peace come vpon it.
 but if it be not worthie let you peace returne to you.
 and whosoeuer shal not receiue you nor heare your wordes when ye departe out of that house or that citie shake of the dust of your fete.
 truely i say vnto you it shalbe easier for them of the land of sodom and gomorrha in the day of iudgement then for that citie.
 beholde i send you as shepe in the middes of wolues.
 be ye therefore wise as serpentes and innocent as doues.
 but beware of men for they will deliuer you vp to the councils and will scourge you in their synagogues.
 and ye shall be broght to the gouernours and kings for my sake in witnes to them and to the gentiles.
 but when they deliuer you vp take no thoght how or what ye shal spake.
 for it shal be giuen you in that houre what ye shall say.
 for it is not ye that speake but the spirit of your father whiche speaketh in you.
 and the brother shall betray the brother to death and the father the sonne and the children shall rise against their parents and cause them to dye.
 and ye shalbe hated of all men for my name.
 but he that endureth to the end he shalbe saued.
 and when they persecute you in this citie flee into another.
 for verely i say vnto you ye shall not finish all the cities of israel till the sonne of man become.
 the disciple is not aboue his master nor the seruant aboue his lord.
 it is ynough for the disciple to be as his master is the seruant as his lord.
 if they haue called the master of the house beelzebub how muche more then of his housholde feare them not therefore.
 for there is nothing couered that shal not be disclosed nor hid that shall not be knowen.
 what i tel you in darkenes that speake ye in light.
 and what ye heare in the eare that preache ye on the houses.
 and feare ye not them which kil the bodie but are not able to kill the soule.
 but rather feare him whiche is able to destroye bothe soule and bodie in hel.
 are not two sparrowes solde for a farthing and one of them shall not fall on the ground without your father.
 yea and all the heeres of you heade are nombred.
 feare ye not therefore ye are of more value then manie sparrowes.
 whosoeuer therefore shal confesse me before men him wil i confesse also before my father which is in heauen.
 but whosoeuer shal denie me before men him wil i also denie before my father which is in heauen.
 thinke not that i am come to send peace into the earth.
 i came not to send peace but the sworde.
 for i am come to set a man at variance against his father the daughter against her mother the daughter in law against her mother in law.
 and a mans enemies shalbe they of his owne housholde.
 he that loueth father or mother more then me is not worthie of me.
 and he that loueth sonne or daughter more then me is not worthie of me.
 and he that taketh not his crosse and followeth after me is not worthie of me.
 he that wil saue his life shal lose it and he that loseth his life for my sake shal saue it.
 he that receiueth you receiueth me.
 and he that receiueth me receiueth him that hathe sent me.
 he that receiueth a prophet in the name of a prophet shal receiue a prophetes rewarde and he that receiueth a righteous man in the name of a righteous man shal receiue the rewarde of a righteous man.
 and whosoeuer shal giue vnto one of these litle ones to drinke a cup of colde water onely in the name of a disciple verely i say vnto you he shal not lose his rewarde.
 and it came to passe that when iesus had made an end of commanding his twelue disciples he departed thence to teach and to preach in their cities.
 and when iohn heard in the prison the workes of christ he sent two of his disciples and said vnto him.
 art thou he that shulde come.
 or shal we loke for another.
 and iesus answering said vnto them go and shewe iohn what things ye haue heard and sene.
 the blinde receiue sight and the halt go.
 the lepers are clensed and the deaf heare.
 the dead are raised vp and the pore receiue the gospel.
 and blessed is he that shal not be offended in me.
 and as they departed iesus began to speake vnto the multitude of iohn what went ye out into the wildernes to se.
 a reed shaken with the winde.
 but what went ye out to se.
 a man clothed in soft raiment.
 beholde they that we are soft clothing are in kings houses.
 but what went ye out to se.
 a prophet.
 yea i say vnto you and more then a prophet.
 for this is he of whome it is written beholde.
 i send my messenger before thy face whiche shall prepare thy way before thee.
 verely i say vnto you among them whiche are begotten of women arose there not a greater then iohn baptist.
 notwithstanding he that is the least in the kingdome of heauen is greater then he.
 and from the time of iohn baptist hitherto the kingdome of heauen suffreth violence and the violent take it by force.
 for al the prophetes and the law prophecied vnto iohn.
 and if ye will receiue it this is elias whiche was to come.
 he that hath eares to heare let him heare but whereunto shall i liken this generation.
 it is like vnto litle children which sit in the markets and call vnto their felowes.
 and say we haue piped vnto you and ye haue not danced we haue mourned vnto you and ye haue not lamented.
 for iohn came nether eating nor drinkyng and they say he hathe a deuil.
 the sonne of man came eatyng and drinking and they say beholde a glotton and a drinker of wine a friend vnto publicanes and sinners.
 but wisdome is iustified of her children.
 then began he to vpbraide the cities wherein most of his great worke were done because they repented not.
 wo be to chorazin.
 wo be to thee bethsaida.
 for if the great workes whiche were done in you had bene done in.
 tyrus and sidon they had repented long agone in and ashes.
 but i say to you it shalbe easier for tyrus and sidon at the day of iudgement then for you.
 and thou capernaum whiche art lifted vp vnto heauen shalt be broght downe to hell.
 for if the great workes whiche haue bene done in thee had bene done among them of sodom they had remained to this day.
 but i say vnto you that it shalbe easier for them of the land of sodom in the day of iudgement then for thee.
 at that time iesus answered and said i giue thee thankes father lord of heauen and earth because thou hast hid these things from the wise and men of vnderstandyng hast opened them vnto babes.
 it is so father because thy good pleasure was suche.
 al things are giuen vnto me of my father.
 and no man knoweth the sonne but the father.
 nether knoweth any man the father but the sonne and he to whome the sonne will reueile him.
 come vnto me all ye that are wearie and laden and i wil ease you.
 take my yoke on you and learne of me that i am meke and lowlie in heart.
 and ye shal finde rest vnto your soules.
 for my yoke is easie and my burden light.
 at that time iesus went on a sabbath day through the corne and his disciples were an hungred and began to plucke the eares of corne and to eat.
 and when the pharises sawe it they said vnto him beholde thy disciples do that which is not lawful to do vpon the sabbath.
 but he said vnto them haue ye not red what dauid did when he was an hungred and they that were with him.
 how he entred into the house of god and ate the shewe bread which was not lawful for him to eat nether for them which were with him but onely for the priests.
 or haue ye not red in the law how that on the sabbath dayes the priests in the temple breake the sabbath and are blameles.
 but i say vnto you that here is one greater then the temple.
 wherefore if ye knewe what this is wil haue mercie and not sacrifice ye wolde not haue condemned the innocents.
 for the sonne of man is lord euen of the sabbath.
 and he departed thence and went into their synagogue.
 and beholde there was a man which had his hand dryed vp.
 and they asked him saying is it lawful to heale vpon a sabbath day.
 that they might accuse him.
 and he said vnto them what man shal there be among you that shal haue a shepe and if it fall on a sabbath day into a pit wil not he take it and lift it out.
 how muche more then is a man better then a shepe.
 therefore it is lawful to do wel on a sabbath day.
 then said he to the man stretch forthe thine hand.
 and he stretched it forthe and it was made whole as the other.
 then the pharises went out and consulted against him how they might destroye him.
 but when iesus knewe it he departed thence and great multitudes followed him and he healed them all and charged them that they shulde not make him knowen that it might be fulfilled which was spoken by esaias the prophet saying beholde my seruant whome i haue chosen my beloued in whome my soule deliteth.
 i wil put my spirit on him and he shal shewe iudgement to the gentiles.
 he shal not striue nor crye nether shal anie man heare his voyce in the stretes.
 a bruised rede shal he not breake and smoking flaxe shal he not quenshe til he bring forthe iudgement vnto victorie.
 and in his name shal the gentiles trust.
 then was broght to him one possessed with a deuil bothe blinde and domme and he healed him so that he which was blinde and domme bothe spake and sawe.
 and all the people were amased said is not this the sonne of dauid.
 but when the pharises heard it they said this man casteth the deuils no other wise out but through beelzebub the prince of deuils.
 but iesus knewe their thoghtes and said to them euerie kingdome deuided against it self shalbe broght to naught.
 and euerie citie or house deuided against it self shal not stand.
 so if satan cast out satan he is deuided against him self.
 how shal then his kingdome endure.
 also if i through beelzebub cast out deuils by whome do your children cast them out.
 therefore they shalbe your iudges.
 but if i cast out deuils by the spirit of god then is the kingdome of god come vnto you.
 els how can a man enter into a strong mans house and spoile his goods except he first binde the strong man and then spoile his house.
 he that is not with me is against me.
 he that gathereth not with me scattereth.
 wherefore i say vnto you euerie sinne and blasphemie shalbe forgiuen vnto men.
 but the blasphemie against the holie gost shall not be forgiuen vnto men.
 and whosoeuer shal speake a worde against the sonne of man it shalbe forgiuen him.
 but whosoeuer shal speake against the holie gost it shal not be forgiuen him nether in this world nor in the worlde to come.
 ether make the tre good and his frute good or els make the tre euil and his frute euil.
 for the tre it knowen by the frute.
 o generacions of vipers how can you speake good things when ye are euil.
 for of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaketh.
 a good man out of the good treasure of his heart bringeth for the good things.
 an euil man out of an euil treasure bringeth forthe euil things.
 but i say vnto you that of euerie idle word that men shal speake they shal giue acounte thereof at the day of iudgement.
 for by thy wordes thou shalt be iustified and by thy wordes thou shalt be condemned.
 then answered certeine of the scribes of the pharises saying.
 master we wolde sea signe of thee.
 but he answered and said to them an euil and adulterous generacion seketh a signe but no signe shal be giuen vnto it saue the signe of the prophet ionas.
 for as ionas was thre dayes and thre nights in the whales bellie.
 so shal the sonne of man be thre dayes and thre nights in the heart of the earth.
 the men of nineue shal rise in iudgement with this generacion and condemne it.
 for they repented at the preaching of ionas.
 beholde a greater then ionas is here.
 the quene of the south shal rise in iudgement with this generacion and shal condemne it.
 for she came from the vtmost parties of the earth to heare the wisdome of solomon.
 and beholde a greater then solomon is here.
 now when the vncleane spirit is gone out of a man he walketh throughout drye places seking rest and findeth none.
 then he saith i wil returne into mine house from whence i came.
 when he is come he findeth it emptie swept and garnished.
 then he goeth taketh vnto him seuen other spirits worse then him self and they entre in and dwell there.
 and the end of that man is worse then the beginning.
 euen so shal it be with this wicked generacion.
 while he yet spake to the multitude beholde his mother and his brethren stode without desiring to speake with him.
 then one said vnto him beholde thy mother and thy brethren stand without desiring to speake with thee.
 but he answered and said to him that tolde him who is my mother.
 and who are my brethren.
 and he stretched forthe his hand towarde his disciples and said beholde my mother and my brethren.
 for whosoeuer shall do my fathers wil which is in heauen the same is my brother and sister and mother.
 the same day went iesus out of the house and sate by the sea side.
 and great multitudes resorted vnto him so that he went into a ship and sate downe.
 and the whole multitude stode on the shore.
 then he spake many things to them in parables saying beholde a sower went forthe to sowe.
 and as he sowed some fel by the wayes side and the foules came and deuoured them vp.
 and some fel vpon stonie grounde where they had not muche earth and anone they sprong vp because they had no depth of earth.
 and when the sunne rose vp they were parched for lacke of rooting with red away.
 and some fel among thornes and the thornes sprong vp and choked them.
 some agayne fell in good grounde and broght forth frute one corne an hundreth folde some sixte folde and another thirtie folde.
 he that hath eares to heare let him heare.
 then the disciples came and said to him why speakest thou to them in parables.
 and he answered and sayd vnto them because it is giuen vnto you to knowe the secrets of the kingdome of heauen but to them it is not giuen.
 for whosoeuer hathe to him shalbe giuen and he shal haue abundance.
 but whosoeuer hathe not from him shalbe taken away euen that he hathe.
 therefore speake i to them in parables because they seing do not se.
 and hearing they heare not nether vnderstand.
 so in them is fulfilled the prophecie of esaias which prophecie saith by hearing ye shal heare and shall not vnderstande and seing ye shal se and shal not perceiue.
 for this peoples heart is waxed fatte and their eares are dul of hearing and with their eyes they haue winked lest they shulde se with eyes and heare with their eares and shulde vnderstande with their hearts and shulde returne that i might heale them.
 but blessed are your eyes for they se.
 and your eares for they heare.
 for verely i say vnto you that many prophetes and righteous men haue desired to se those things which ye se and haue not sene them and to heare those things whiche ye heare and haue not heard them.
 heare ye therefore the parable of the sower.
 whensoeuer a man heareth the worde of the kingdome and vnderstandeth it not the euil one cometh catcheth away that whiche was sowen in his heart.
 this is he which hathe receiued the sede by the way side.
 and he that receyued sede in the stonie grounde is he which heareth the word and incontinenly with ioye receiueth.
 yet hathe he no roote in him self and dureth but a season.
 for assone as tribulation or persecution cometh because of the worde by and by he is offended.
 and he that receiueth the sede among thornes is he that heareth the word.
 but the care of this worlde and the deceitfulnes of riches choke the worde and he is made vnfrutful.
 but he that receyueth the sede in the good grounde is he that heareth the worde vnderstandeth it which also beareth frute and bringeth forth some an hundreth folde some sixtie folde and some thirtie folde.
 another parable put he forthe vnto them saying the kingdome of heauen is like vnto a man which sowed good seed in his field.
 but while men slept there came hys enemie and sowed tares among the wheat and went his way.
 and when the blade was sprong vp broght forthe frute then appeared the tares also.
 then came the seruants of the householder and sayd vnto him master sowedst not thou good sede in thy field.
 from whence then hathe it tares.
 and he said to them the enuious man hathe done this.
 then the seruants said vnto him wilt thou then that we go and gather them vp.
 but he said nay lest while ye go about to gather the tares ye pluck vp also with them the wheat.
 let bothe growe together vntill the haruest and in tyme of haruest i will say to the reapers gather ye first the tares and bynde them in sheaues to burne them.
 but gather the wheat into my barne.
 another parable he put forthe vnto them saying the kingdome of heauen is like vnto a graine of mustard sede which a man taketh and soweth in his field.
 which in dede is the least of all sedes.
 but when it is growen it is the greatest among herbes and it is a tre so that the birdes of heauen come and buylde in the branches thereof.
 another parable speake he to them the kyngdome of heauen is lyke vnto leauen which a woman taketh and hideth in three peckes of meale til all be leauened.
 al these things spake iesus vnto the multitude in parables and without parables spake he not to them.
 that it might be fulfilled whiche was spoken by the prophet saying i wil open my mouth in parables and will vtter the things which haue bene kept secret from the fundacion of the worlde.
 then sent iesus the multitude awaye and went into the house.
 and his disciples came vnto hym.
 saying declare vnto vs the parable of the tares of the field.
 then answered he and said to them he that soweth the good sede is the sonne of man.
 and the field is the worlde and the good sede they are the children of the kingdome and the tares are the children of the wicked and the enemie that soweth them is the deuil and the haruest is the end of the world and the reapers be the angels.
 as then the tares are gathered and burned in the fyre so shall it be in the end of thys worlde.
 the sonne of man shal sende forthe hys angels and they shall gather out of his kyngdome al things that offend and them which do iniquitie.
 and shall caste them into a furnais of fyre.
 there shalbe wailing and of teeth.
 then shall the iust men shine as the sunne in the kyngdome of their father.
 he that hathe eares to let him heare.
 againe the kingdome of heauen is lyke vnto a treasure hid in the field which when a man hath founde he hideth it and for ioye thereof departeth and selleth al that he hath and byeth that field.
 againe the kingdome of heauen is lyke to a marchant man that seketh good perles.
 who hauing founde a perle of great price went and solde all that he had and boght it.
 againe the kingdome of heauen is like vnto a drawe net cast into the sea that gathereth of all kindes of things.
 which when it is full men drawe to land and sit and gather the good into vessels and cast the bad away.
 so shal it be at the end of the worlde the angels shal go forthe and feuer the bad from among the iust.
 and shall cast them into a furnais of fyre.
 there shall be wailling gnashing of teeth.
 iesus said vnto them vnderstand ye all these things.
 they said vnto him yea lord.
 then said he vnto them therefore euerie scribe which is taught vnto the kingdome of heauen is like vnto an householder whiche bringeth forth out of his treasure thinges bothe newe and olde.
 and it came to passe that when iesus had ended these parables he departed thence.
 and came into his owne countrey and taught them in their synagogue so that they were astonied and said whence cometh this wisdome and great workes vnto this man.
 is not thys the carpenters sonne.
 is not his mother called marie and his brethren iames and ioses and simon and iudas.
 and are not his sisters all with vs.
 whence then hathe he all these things.
 and they were offended with him.
 then iesus said to them a prophet is not without honour saue in his owne countrey and in his owne house.
 and he did not many greate workes there for their vnbeliefes sake.
 at that time herode the tetrarch heard of the fame of iesus.
 and said vnto his seruants this is iohn baptist.
 he is risen againe from the dead and therfore great workes are wroght by him.
 for herode had taken iohn and bounde him and put him in prison for herodias sake his brother philips wife.
 for iohn said vnto him it is not lawful for thee to haue her.
 and when he wolde haue put him to death he feared the multitude because they counted him as a prophet.
 but when herodes birthday was kept the daughter of herodias danced before them and pleased herode.
 wherefore he promised with an othe that he wold giue her whatsoeuer she old aske.
 and she being before instructed of her mother said giue me here iohn baptist head in a platter.
 and the king was sorie.
 neuertheles because of the othe and them that sate with him at the table he commanded it to be giuen her.
 and sent and beheaded iohn in the prison.
 and his head was broght in a platter and giuen to the maide and she broght it vnto her mother.
 and his disciples came and toke vp his bodie and buried it and went and tolde iesus.
 and when iesus heard it he departed thence by ship into a desert place a parte.
 and when the multitude had heard it they followed him a fote out of the cities.
 and iesus went forthe and sawe a great multitude and was moued with compassion towarde them and he healed their sicke.
 and when euen was come his disciples came to him saying this is a desert place and the houre is alreadie paste.
 let the multitude departe that they may go into the townes and bye them vitailes.
 but iesus said to them they haue no nede to go away.
 giue ye them to eat.
 then said they vnto him we haue here but fiue loaues and two fishes.
 and he said bring them hether to me.
 and he commanded the multitude to sit downe on the grasse and toke the fiue loaues and two fishes and loked vp to heauen and blessed and brake and gaue the loaues to his disciples the disciples to the multitude and they did all eat and were sufficed and they toke vp of the fragments that remained twelue baskets ful.
 and they that had eaten were aboute fiue thousand men beside women litle children.
 and straight way iesus compelled his disciples to enter into a ship and to go ouer before him while he sent the multitude away.
 and assone as he had sent the multitude awaye he went vp into a mountaine alone to pray.
 and when the euening was come he was there alone.
 and the ship was now in the middes of the sea and was tossed with waues.
 for it was a contrarie winde.
 and in the fourth watche of the night iesus went vnto them walking on the sea.
 and when his disciples sawe him walking on the sea they were troubled saying it is a spirit and cryed out for feare.
 but strayght waye iesus spake vnto them saying be of good comforte.
 it is i.
 be not afrayed.
 then peter answered him and said master if it be thou byd me come vnto thee on the water.
 and he sayd come.
 and when peter was come downe out of the ship he walked on the water to go to iesus.
 but when he sawe a mightie winde he was afraied.
 and as he beganne to sinke he cried saying master saue me.
 so immediatly iesus stretched forthe hys hand and caught him and said to him o thou of litle faith wherefore didest thou dout.
 and assone as they were come into the ship the winde ceased.
 then they that were in the ship came and worshipped him saying of a trueth thou art the sonne of god.
 and when they were come ouer thei came into the land of gennesaret.
 and when the men of that place knewe him they sent out into all that countrey rounde about and broght vnto him all that were sicke.
 and besoght him that they might touche the hemme of his garment onely.
 and as manie as touch edit were made whole.
 then came to iesus the scribes and pharises which were of ierusalem saying why do thy disciples transgresse the tradicion of the elders.
 for they wash not their hands when they eat bread.
 but he answered said vnto them why do ye also transgresse the commandement of god by your tradicion.
 for god hathe commanded saying honour thy father and mother.
 and he that curseth father or mother let him dye the death.
 but ye say whosoeuer shal say to father or mother by the gift that is offred.
 by me thou maiest haue profite thogh he honour not his father or his mother shalbe fre.
 thus haue ye made the commandement of god of no autoritie by your tradicion.
 o hypocrites esaias prophecied well of you saying this people draweth nere vnto me with their mouth and honoureth me with the lip but their heart is farre of from me.
 but in vaine they worship me teaching for doctrines mens precepts.
 then he called the multitude vnto him said to them heare and vnderstand.
 that which goeth into the mouth defileth not the man but that whiche cometh out of the mouth that defileth the man.
 then came his disciples and said vnto him perceiuest thou not that the pharises are offended in hearing this saying.
 but he answered and said euerie plant which mine heauenlie father hathe not planted shalbe rooted vp.
 let them alone.
 they be the blinde leaders of the blinde.
 if the blinde leade the blinde bothe shal fall into the ditche.
 then answered peter and said to him declare vnto vs this parable.
 then said iesus are ye yet without vnderstanding.
 perceiue ye not yet that whatsoeuer entreth into the mouth goeth into the bellie and is cast out into the draught.
 but those things which procede out of the mouth come from the heart and they defile the man.
 for out of the heart come euil thoghts murders adulteries fornicacions thefts false testimonies sclanders.
 these are the things which defile the man.
 but to eat with vnwashen handes defileth not the man.
 and iesus went thence and departed into the coasts of tyrus and sidon.
 and beholde a woman a cananite came out of the same coasts and cryed saying vnto him haue mercie on me lord the sonne of dauid.
 my daughter is miserably vexed with a deuil.
 but he answered her not a worde.
 then came to him his disciples besoght him saying send her away for she cryeth after vs.
 but he answered and said i am not sent but vnto the lost shepe of the house of israel.
 yet she came and worshipped him saying lord helpe me.
 and he answered and said it is not good to take the childrens bread and to cast it to whelpes.
 but she said trueth lord.
 yet in dede the whelpes eat of the crommes which fall from their masters table.
 then iesus answered and said vnto her o woman great is thy faith.
 be it to thee as thou desirest.
 and her daughter was made whole at that houre.
 so iesus away from thence came nere vnto the sea of galile and went vp into a mountaine and sate downe there.
 and great multitudes came vnto him hauing with them halt blinde domme maymed and manie other and cast them downe at iesus feete and he healed them in so muche that the multitude wondered to se the domme speake the maymed whole the halt to go and the blinde to se.
 and they glorified the god of israel.
 then iesus called his disciples vnto him and said i haue compassion on this multitude because they haue continued with me alreadie thre dayes and haue nothing to eat.
 and i wil not let them departe fasting lest they fainte in the way.
 and his disciples said vnto him whence shulde we get so muche bread in the wildernes as shulde suffice so great a multitude.
 and iesus said vnto them how manie loaues haue ye.
 and they said seuen and a fewe litle fishes.
 then he commanded the multitude to sit downe on the grounde and toke the seuen loaues and the fishes gaue thankes and brake them gaue to his disciples and the disciples to the multitude.
 and they did all eat and were sufficed.
 and they toke vp of the fragments that remained seuen baskets full.
 and they that had eaten were foure thousand men beside women and litle children.
 then iesus sent awaye the multitude and toke shippe and came into the partes of magdala.
 then came the pharises and sadduces and did tempt hym desirynge hym to shewe them a signe from heauen.
 but he answered and said vnto them when it is euenyng ye say fayre wether.
 for the skie is red.
 and in the morning ye say to day shalbe a tempeste.
 for the skie is red and lowryng.
 o hypocrites ye can discerne the face of the skie and can ye not discerne the signes of the times.
 the wicked generacion and adulterous seketh a signe and there shal no signe be giuen it but the signe of the prophet ionas.
 so he left them and departed.
 and when his disciples were come to the other side they had forgotten to take bread with them.
 then iesus sayd vnto them take hede and beware of the leauen of the pharises and sadduces.
 and they thoght in them selues saying it is because we haue broght no bread.
 but iesus knowing it said vnto them o ye of litle faith why thinke you thus in your selues because ye haue broght no bread.
 do ye not yet perceiue nether remember the fiue loaues when there were fiue thousand men how manie baskets toke ye vp.
 nether the seuen loaues when there were foure thousand men and how manie baskets toke ye vp.
 why perceiue ye not that i said not vnto you concerning bread that ye shuld beware of the leauen of the pharises and sadduces.
 then vnderstode they that he had not sayd that they shulde beware of the leauen of bread but of the doctrine of the pharises and sadduces.
 now when iesus came into the coastes of cesarea philippi he asked hys disciples saying whome do men say that i the sonne of man am.
 and they said some say iohn baptist and some elias.
 and others ieremias or one of the prophetes.
 he said vnto them but whome saye ye that i am.
 then simon peter answered and sayd thou art the christ the sonne of the liuyng god.
 and iesus answered and said to him blessed art thou simon the sonne of ionas.
 for flesh and blood hathe not reueiled it vnto thee but my father which is in heauen.
 and i say also vnto thee that thou art peter and vpon this rocke i will buylde my church.
 and the gates of hell shal not ouercome it.
 and i will giue thee the keyes of the kingdome of heauen and whatsoeuer thou shalt binde vpon earth shalbe bound in heauen.
 whosoeuer thou shalt lose on earth shalbe losed in heauen.
 then he charged hys disciples that they shulde tell no man that he was iesus the christ.
 from that tyme forthe iesus began to shewe vnto his disciples that he must go vnto ierusalem and suffer manie things of the elders and of the hie priests and scribes and be slaine and rise againe the thirde day.
 then peter toke hym aside and began to rebuke him saying master pitie thy self.
 this shal not be vnto thee.
 then he turned backe and vnto peter get thee behinde me satan.
 thou art an offence vnto me because thou vnderstandest not the things that are of god but the thinges that are of men.
 iesus then said to his disciples if any man wil followe me let him forsake him self and take vp his crosse and followe me.
 for whosoeuer wil saue his life shal lose it.
 and whosoeuer shall lose his life for my sake shal finde it.
 for what shall it profite a man thogh he shuld winne the whole worlde if he lose his owne soule.
 or what shall a man giue for recompense of his soule.
 for the sonne of man shal come in the glorie of his father with his angels and then shal he giue to euerie man accordyng to his dedes.
 verely i saye vnto you there be some of them that stand here which shal not taste of death till they haue sene the sonne of man come in his kingdome.
 and after six dayes iesus toke peter and iames and iohn his brother and broght them vp into an hie mountaine a parte.
 and was transfigured before them.
 and his face did shyne as the sunne and his clothes were as white as the light.
 and beholde there appeared vnto them moses and elias talking with him.
 then answered peter and said to iesus master it is good for vs to be here.
 if thou wilt let vs make here thre tabernacles one for thee and one for moses and one for elias.
 while he yet spake behold a bright cloude shadowed them.
 and beholde there came a voyce out of the cloude saying this is my beloued sonne in whom i am wel pleased.
 heare him.
 and the disciples heard that they fel on their faces and were sore afrayed.
 then iesus came and touched them and said arise and be not afraid.
 and when they lifted vp their eyes they sawe no man saue iesus onely.
 and as they came downe from the mountaine iesus charged them saying shewe the vision to no man vntill the sonne of man rise againe from the dead.
 and his disciples asked him saying why then saye the scribes that elias must firste come.
 and iesus answered and sayd vnto them certeinely elias must first come and restore all things.
 but i say vnto you that elias is come already and they knewe him not but haue done vnto him whatsoeuer they wolde.
 like wise shal also the sonne of man suffer of them.
 then the disciples perceiued that he spake vnto them of iohn baptist.
 and when they were come to the multitude there came to him a certeine man and kneled downe to him.
 and said master haue pitie on my sonne.
 for he is lunatike and is sore vexed.
 for oft times he falleth into the fyre and oft tymes into the water.
 and i broght him to thy disciples and they colde not heale him.
 then iesus answered and said o generacion faithles and croked howe long nowe shall i be with you.
 how longe nowe shall i suffer you.
 bring him hitherto me.
 and iesus rebuked the deuill and he went out of him.
 and the childe was healed at that houre.
 then came the disciples to iesus a parte and said why colde not we cast him out.
 and iesus said vnto them because of your vnbeliefe.
 for verely i say vnto you if ye haue faith as muche as is a graine of mustard sede ye shal say vnto this mountaine remoue hence to yonder place and it shal remoue.
 and nothing shalbe vnpossible vnto you.
 how be it this kinde goeth not out but by prayer and fasting.
 and as they abode in galile iesus sayd vnto them the sonne of man shal be deliuered into the hands of men.
 and they shal kil him but the third day shal he rise againe.
 and they were very sorie.
 and when they were come to capernaum they that receiued polle money came to peter and sayd doeth not your master pay tribute.
 he said yes.
 and when he was come into the house iesus preuented him saying what thinkest thou simon.
 of whom do the kings of the earth take tribute or polle money.
 of their children or of strangers.
 peter said vnto him of strangers.
 then said iesus vnto him then are the children fre.
 neuertheles lest we shuld offende them go to the sea and cast in an angle and take the first fishe that cometh vp and when thou hast opened his mouth thou shalt finde a piece of twentie pence.
 that taken and giue vnto them for me and thee.
 the same tyme the disciples came vnto iesus saying who is the greatest in the kingdome of heauen.
 and iesus called a litle childe vnto him and set him in the middes of them.
 and said verely i say vnto you except ye be conuerted and become as litle children ye shal not enter into the kingdome of heauen.
 whosoeuer therefore shal humble him self as this litle childe the same is the greatest in the kingdome of heauen.
 and whosoeuer shall receiue suche a lytle childe in my name receiueth me.
 but whosoeuer shall offende one of these litle ones which beleue in me it were better for him that a mylstone were hanged about his necke and that he were drowned in the depth of the sea.
 wo be vnto the worlde because of offences.
 for it must nedes be that offences shall come but wo be to that man by whome the offence cometh.
 wherefore if thine hand or thy fote cause thee to offende cut them of and cast them from thee.
 it is better for thee to enter into life halt or maimed then hauing two hands or two fete to be cast into euerlasting fyre.
 and if thine eye cause thee to offend plucke it out and cast it from thee.
 it is better for thee to enter into life with one eye then hauing two eyes to be cast into hell fyre.
 se that ye despice not one of these lytleones.
 for i say vnto you that in heauen their angels alwayes behold the face of my father which is in heauen.
 for the sonne of man is come to saue that which was lost.
 how thinke ye.
 if a man haue an hundreth shepe and one of them begone astraye doeth he not leaue ninetie and nine and go into the mountaines and seke that which is gone astray.
 and if so be that he finde it verely i saye vnto you he reioyceth more of that shepe then of the ninetie and nine whiche went not astray.
 so is it not the wil of your father whiche is in heauen that one of these litle ones shulde perish.
 moreouer if thy brother trespace against thee go and tell him his faute betwene thee and him alone.
 if he heare thee thou hast wonne thy brother.
 but if he heare thee not take yet with thee one or two that by the mouth of two or thre witnesses euerie worde may be confirmed.
 and if he wil not vouche saue to heare them tel it vnto the church.
 and if he refuse to heare the church also let him be vnto thee as an heathen man and a publicane.
 verely i say vnto you whatsoeuer ye binde on earth shalbe bounde in heauen and whatsoeuer ye lose on earth shal be losed in heauen.
 againe verely i say vnto you that if two of you shal agre in earth vpon any thing whatsoeuer they shal desire it shal be giuen them of my father which is in heauen.
 for where two or thre are gathered together in my name there am i in the middes of them.
 then came peter to him said master how oft shal my brother sinne against me and i shal forgiue him.
 vnto seuen times.
 iesus said vnto him i say not to thee vnto seuen times but vnto seuentie times seuen times.
 therefore is the kingdome of likened vnto a certeine king whiche wolde take a countes of his seruants.
 and when he had begonne to recken one was broght vnto him whiche oght him ten thousand talents.
 and because he had nothing to paye his master commanded him to be solde and his wife and his children and all that he had the dette to be payed.
 the seruant therefore fel downe and besoght him saying master appease thine angre towarde me and i wil pay thee all.
 then that seruants master had compassion and losed him and forgaue him the dette.
 but when the seruant was departed he founde one of his felowes which oght him an hundreth pence he layed hands on him and toke him by the throte saying pay me that thou owest.
 then his felowe fel downe at his fete and besoght him saying appease thine angre towards me and i wil pay thee all.
 yet he wolde not but went and cast him into prison til he shulde pay the dette.
 and when his other felowes sawe what was done they were very sorie and came and declared vnto their master all that was done.
 then his master called him and said to him o euil seruant i forgaue thee all that dette because thou prayedst me.
 oghtest not thou also to haue had pitie on thy felow euen as i had pitie on thee.
 so his master was wroth and deliuered him to the iaylers til he shulde pay all that was due to him.
 so like wise shal mine heauenlie father do vnto you except ye forgiue from your hearts eche one to his brother their trespaces.
 and it came to passe that when iesus had finished those sayings he departed from galile and came into the coastes of iudea beyonde iordan.
 and great multitudes followed him and he healed them there.
 then came vnto him the pharises tempting him and saying to him it is lawful for a man to put away his wife for euerie faute.
 and he answered and said vnto them haue ye not red that he which made them at the beginning made them male and female and said for this cause shal a man leaue father and mother and cleaue vnto his wife and they twaine shalbe one flesh.
 wherefore they are no more twaine but one flesh.
 let not man therefore put a sundre that which god hathe coupled together.
 they said to him why did then moses commande to giue a bil of diuorcement and to put her away.
 he said vnto them moses because of the hardnes of your heart you to put away your wiues.
 but from the beginning it was not so.
 i say therefore vnto you that whosoeuer shal put away his wife except it be for whoredome marie another committeth adulterie.
 whosoeuer marieth her which is diuorced doeth commit adulterie.
 then said his disciples to him the matter be so betwene man wif it is not good to marie but he said vnto them all men can not receiue this thing saue they to whome it is giuen.
 for there are some chaste which were so borne of their mothers bellie.
 and there be some chaste which be made chaste by men.
 and there be some chaste which haue made themselues chaste for the kingdome of heauen.
 he that is able to receiue this let him receiue it.
 then were broght to him litle children that he shulde put his hands on them and pray.
 and the disciples rebuked them.
 but iesus said suffer the litle children and forbid them not to come to me.
 for of suche is the kingdome of heauen.
 and when he had put his hands on them he departed thence.
 and beholde one came and said vnto him good master what good thing shal i do that i may haue eternal life.
 and he said vnto him why callest thou me good.
 there is none good but oue euen god.
 but if thou wilt entre into life.
 kepe the commandements.
 he said to him whiche.
 and iesus said these thou shalt not kil.
 thou shalt not commit adulterie.
 thou shalt not steale.
 thou shalt not beare false witnes.
 honour thy father and mother.
 and thou shalt loue thy neighbour as thy self.
 the yong man said vnto him i haue obserued all these things from my youth.
 what lacke i yet.
 iesus said vnto him if thou wilt be perfite go sel that thou hast and giue it to the poore and thou shalt haue treasure in heauen and come and followe me.
 and when the yong man heard that saying he went away sorowful.
 for he had great possessions.
 then iesus said vnto his disciples verely i say vnto you that a riche man shal hardely enter into the kingdome of heauen.
 and againe i say vnto you it is easier for a camel to go through the eye of nedle then for a riche man to enter into the kingdome of god.
 and when his disciples heard it thei were excedingly amased saying who then can be saued.
 and iesus behelde them and said vnto them with men this is vnpossible but with god all things are possible.
 then answered peter and said to him beholde we haue forsaken all and followed thee.
 what shal we haue.
 and iesus said vnto them verely i say to you that when the sonne of man shal sit in the throne of his maiestie ye which followed me in the regeneracion shal sit also vpon twelue thrones and iudge the twelue tribes of israel.
 and who so euer shal forsake houses or brethren or sisters or father or mother or wife or children or lands for my name sake he shal receiue an hundreth folde more and shal inherite euerlasting life.
 but manie that are first shalbe last and tho last shalbe first.
 for the kingdome of heauen is like vnto a certeine house holder which went out at at the dawning of the day to hier laborers into his vineyarde.
 and he agreed with the laborers for penie a day and sent them into his vineyarde.
 and he went out about the thirde houre and sawe other standing ydle in the market place and said vnto them go ye also into my vineyarde and whatsoeuer is right i wil you and they went their way.
 againe he went out about the sixt and ninth houre and did like wise.
 and he went about the eleuenth houre and founde other standing ydle and said vnto them why stand ye here all the day ydle.
 they said vnto him because no man hathe hired vs.
 he said to them go ye also into my vineyarde and whatsoeuer is right that shal ye receiue.
 and when euen was come the master of the vineyard said vnto his steward call the laborers and giue them their hier beginning at the last til thou come to the first.
 and they which were hired about the eleuenth houre came and receiued euerie man a penie.
 now when the first came they supposed that they shulde receiue more but they like wise receiued euerie man a penie.
 and when they had receiued it they murmured against the master of the house saying these last haue wroght but one houre and thou hast made them equal vnto vs which haue borne the burden and heat of the day.
 and he answered one of them saying friend i do thee no wrong.
 didest thou not agre with me for a penie.
 take that which is thine owne and go thy way.
 i wil giue vnto this last as muche as to thee.
 is it not lawful for me to do as i wil with mine owne.
 is thine eye euil because i am good.
 so the last shalbe first and the first last.
 for manie are called but fewe chosen.
 and iesus went vp to ierusalem and toke the twelue disciples a parte in the way and said vnto them.
 beholde we go vp to ierusalem and the sonne of man shalbe deliuered vnto the chief priests and vnto the scribes and they shal condemne him to death and shal deliuer him to the gentiles mocke and to scourge to crucifie him.
 but the thirde day he shal rise againe.
 then came to him the mother of zebedeus children with her sonnes worshipping him and desiring a certeine thing of him.
 and he said vnto her what woldest thou.
 she said to him grante that these my two sonnes may sit the one at thy right hand and the other at thy left hand in thy kingdome.
 and iesus answered and said ye knowe not what ye aske.
 are ye able to drinke of the cup that i shal drinke of and to be baptized with the baptisme that i shalbe baptized with.
 they said to him we are able.
 and he said vnto them ye shal drinke in dede of my cup and shalbe baptized with the baptisme that i am baptized with but to sit at my right hand and at my left hand is not mine to giue.
 but it shalbe giuen to them for whome it is prepared of my father.
 and when the other ten heard this they disdained at the two brethren therefore iesus called them vnto him and said ye knowe that the lords of the gentiles haue domination ouer them and they that are great exercise autoritie ouer them.
 but it shal not be so among you.
 but whosoeuer wil be great among you let him be your seruant.
 and whosoeuer wil be chief among you let him be your seruant euen as the sonne of man came not to be serued but to serue.
 and to giue his life for the ransome of manie.
 and as they departed from iericho a great multitude followed him.
 and beholde two blinde men sitting by the way side when they heard that iesus passed by cryed saying o lord the sonne of dauid haue mercie on vs.
 and the multitude rebuked them because they shuld holde their peace.
 but they cryed the more saying o lord the sonne of dauid haue mercie on vs.
 then iesus stode stil and called them and said what wil ye that i shulde do to you.
 they said to him lord that our eyes may be opened.
 and iesus moued with compassion touched their eyes immediatly their eyes receiued sight and they followed him.
 and when they drew nere to ierusalem and were come to bethphage vnto the mount of the oliues then sent iesus two disciples.
 saying to them go into the towne that is ouer against you and anone ye shal finde an asse bounde and a colte with her.
 lose them and bring them vnto me.
 and if anie man say oght vnto you say ye that the lord hathe nede of them straight way he wil let them go.
 all this was done that it might be fulfilled which was spoken by the prophet saying tel ye the daughter of sion beholde thy king cometh vnto thee meke and sitting vpon an asse and a colte the fole of an asse vsed to the yoke.
 so the disciples went and did as iesus had commanded them and broght the asse and the colte put on them their clothes and set him thereon.
 and a great multitude spred their garments in the way.
 and other cutte downe branches from the trees and strawed them in the way.
 moreouer the people that went before and they also that followed cryed saying hosanna the sonne of dauid.
 blessed be he that cometh in the name of the lord hosanna thou which art in the hiest heauens.
 and when he was come into ierusalem all the citie was moued saying who is this.
 and the people said this is iesus the prophet of nazaret in galile.
 and iesus went into the temple of god and cast out all them that solde boght in the temple and ouerthrew the tables of the money changers and the seates of them that solde doues.
 and said to them it is written mine house shalbe called the house of prayer.
 but ye haue made it a denne of thieues.
 then the blinde and the halt came to him in the temple and he healed them.
 but when the chief priests and scribes sawe the marueils that he did and the children crying in the temple and saying hosanna the sonne of dauid they disdained and said vnto him hearest thou what these say.
 and iesus said vnto them yea.
 red ye neuer by the mouth of babes and suckelings thou hast made perfite the praise.
 so he left them and went out of the citie vnto bethania and lodged there.
 and in the morning as he returned into the citie he was hungrie and seing a figge tre in the way he came to it and founde nothing thereon but leaues onely and said to it.
 neuer frute grow on thee hence forwardes.
 and anone the figge tree withered.
 and when his disciples sawe it they marueiled saying how sone is the figge tre with red.
 and iesus answered and said vnto them verely i say vnto you if ye haue faith and dout not ye shal not onely do that which i haue done to the figge tree but also if ye say vnto this mountaine take thy self away and cast thy self into the sea it shalbe done.
 and whatsoeuer ye shal aske in prayer if ye beleue ye shal receiue it.
 and when he was come into the temple the chief priests and the elders of the people came vnto him as he was teaching and said by what autoritie doest thou these things.
 who gaue thee this autoritie.
 then iesus answered and said vnto them i also wil aske of you a certeine thing which if ye tel me i like wise wil tell you by what autoritie i do these things.
 the baptisme of iohn whence was it.
 from heauen or of men.
 then they reasoned among them selues saying if we shal say from heauen he wil say vnto vs why did ye not then beleue him.
 and if we say of men we feare the people.
 for all holde iohn as a prophet.
 then they answered iesus and said we can not tel.
 and he said vnto them nether tel i you by what autoritie i do these things.
 but what thinke ye.
 a certeine man had two sonnes and came to the elder and said sonne go and worke to day in my vineyard.
 but he answered and said i wil not.
 yet afterwarde he repented him self and went.
 then came he to the seconde and said like wise.
 and he answered and said i wil syr.
 yet he went not.
 whether of them twaine did the wil of the father.
 they said vnto him the first iesus said vnto them verely i say vnto you that the publicanes and the harlots shal go before you into the kingdome of god.
 for iohn came vnto you in the way of righteousnes and ye beleued him not.
 but the publicanes and the harlots beleued him and ye thogh ye sawe it were not moued with repentance afterwarde that ye might beleue him.
 heare another parable there was a certeine housholder which planted a vineyarde and hedged it round about and made a wine presse therein buylt a tower and let it out to housband men and went into a strange countrey.
 and when the time of the frute drewe nere he sent hys seruants to the housband men to receiue the frutes thereof.
 and the housband men toke his seruants beat one and killed another and stoned another.
 againe he sent other seruants mo then the first.
 and they did the like vnto them.
 but last of all he sent vnto them his owne sonne saying they wil reuerence my sonne.
 but when the housband men sawe the sonne they said among them selues this is the heire.
 come let vs kill him and let vs take his inheritance.
 so they toke him and cast him out of the vineyarde and slewe him.
 when therefore the lord of the vineyarde shal come what wil he do to those housbandmen.
 they said vnto him he wil cruelly destroye those wicked men and wil let out his vineyarde vnto other housband men which shal deliuer him the frutes in their seasons.
 iesus said vnto them redye neuer in the scriptures the stone which the buylders refused the same is made the head of the corner.
 this was the lords doing and it is marueilous in our eyes.
 therefore say i vnto you the kingdome of god shalbe taken from you and shalbe giuen to a nacion which shal bring forthe the frutes thereof.
 and whosoeuer shal fall on this stone he shalbe broken.
 but on whosoeuer it shal fall.
 it wil grinde him to powder.
 and when the chief priests and pharises had heard his parables they perceiued that he spake of them.
 and they seking to lay hands on him feared the people they toke him as a prophet.
 then iesus answered and spake vnto them againe in parables saying.
 the kingdome of heauen is like vnto a certeine king which maried his sonne and sent forthe his seruants to call them that were bid to the wedding but they wolde not come.
 againe he sent forthe other seruants saying tel them which are bidden beholde i haue prepared my dinner.
 mine oxen and my fatlings are killed all things are readie.
 come vnto the mariage.
 but they made light of it and went their wayes one to his ferme and another about his marchandise.
 and the remnant toke his seruants intreated them sharpely and slewe them.
 but when the king heard it he was wroth and sent forthe his and destroyed those murtherers and burnt vp their citie.
 then said he to his seruants truely the wedding is prepared.
 but they which were bidden were not worthie.
 go ye therefore out into the high wayes and as manie as ye finde bid them to the mariage.
 so those seruants went out into the hie wayes and gathered together all that euer they founde bothe good and bad.
 so the wedding was furnished with ghestes.
 then the king came in to se the ghestes and saw there a man which had not on a wedding garment.
 and he said vnto him friend how camest thou in hither hast not on a wedding garment.
 and he was speacheles.
 then said the king to the seruants binde him hand and fote.
 take him away and cast him into vtter darkenes.
 there shalbe weping and of teeth.
 for manie are called but fewe chosen.
 then went the pharises and toke counsel how they might tangle him in talke.
 and they sent vnto him their disciples with the herodians sayinge master we knowe that thou art true and teachest the waye of god truelye nether carest for anye man.
 for thou considerest not the persone of men.
 tell vs therefore how thinkest thou.
 is it lawful to giue tribute vnto cesar or not.
 but iesus perceiued their wickednes and said why tempt ye me ye hypocrites.
 shewe me the tribute money.
 and thei broght him a penie.
 and he said vnto them whose is this image and superscription.
 they said vnto him cesars.
 then said he vnto them giue therefore to cesar the things which are cesars and giue vnto god those which are gods.
 and when they heard it thei marueiled and left him and went their way.
 the same day the sadduces came to him which say that there is no resurrection and asked him saying master moses said if a man dye hauing no children let his brother marie his wife and raise vp sede vnto his brother.
 now there were with vs seuen brethren and the first maried a wife and deceased.
 hauing none yssue left his wife vnto his brother.
 like wise also the seconde and the third vnto the seuenth.
 and last of all the woman dyed also.
 therefore in the resurrection whose wife shal she be of the seuen.
 for all had her.
 then iesus answered and said vnto them ye are deceiued not knowing the scriptures nor the power of god.
 for in the resurrection they nether marie wiues nor wiues are bestowed in mariage but are as the angels of god in heauen.
 and concerning the resurrection of the dead haue ye not red what is spoken vnto you of god saying i am the god of abraham and the god of isaac and the god of iacob.
 god is not the god of the dead but of the liuing and when the people heard it they were astonied at his doctrine.
 but when the pharises had heard that he had put the sadduces to silence they assembled together.
 and one of them which was an expounder of the law asked him a question tempting him and saying master which is the great commandement in the law.
 iesus said to him thou shalt loue the lord thy god with all thine heart with all thy soule and with all thy minde.
 this is the first and the great commandement.
 and the seconde is like vnto this thou shalt loue thy neighbour as thy self.
 on these two commandements hangeth the whole law and the prophetes.
 while the pharises were gathered together iesus asked them saying what thinke ye of christ.
 whose sonne is he.
 they said vnto him dauids.
 he said vnto them how then doeth dauid in spirit call him lord saying the lord said to my lord sit at my right hand til i make thine enemies thy fotestole.
 if then dauid call him.
 lord how is he his sonne.
 and none colde answer him a worde nether durst anie from that daye forthe aske him anie mo questions.
 then spake iesus to the multitude and to his disciples saying the scribes and the pharises sit in moses seat.
 all therefore whatsoeuer they byd you obserue that obserue and do.
 but after their workes do not.
 for they say and do not.
 for they binde heauie burdens and grieuous to be borne and laye them on mens shulders but they them selues wil not moue them with one of their fingers.
 all their workes they do for to be sene of men.
 for they make their phy lacteries broad make long the fringes of their garments.
 and loue the chief place at feasts and to haue the chief seates in the assemblies and gretings in the markets and to be called of men rabbi rabbi.
 but be not ye called rabbi.
 for one is yourdoctor to wit christ and all ye are brethren.
 and call no man your father vpon the earth.
 for their is but one your father which is in heauen.
 be not called doctors.
 for one is your doctor euen christ.
 but he that is greatest among you let him be your seruant.
 for whosoeuer wil exalt him self shalbe broght low.
 and whosoeuer wil humble him self shalbe exalted.
 wo therefore be vnto you scribes and pharises hypocrites because ye shut vp the kingdome of heauen before men.
 for ye your selues go not in nether suffer ye them that wolde enter to come in.
 wo be vnto you scribes and pharises hypocrites.
 for ye deuoure widdowes houses euen vnder a colour of long prayers.
 wherefore ye shal receiue the greater damnacion.
 wo be vnto you scribes and pharises hypocrites.
 for ye compasse sea and land to make one of your profession.
 and when he is made ye make him two folde more the childe of hel then you your selues.
 wo be vnto you blinde guides whiche say whosoeuer sweareth by the temple it is nothing.
 but whosoeuer sweareth by the golde of the temple he offendeth.
 ye fooles and blinde whether is greater the golde.
 or the temple that sanctifieth the golde.
 and whosoeuer sweareth by the altar it is nothing.
 but whosoeuer sweareth by the offring that is vpon it offendeth.
 ye fooles and blinde whether is greater the offryng or the altar whiche sanctifieth the offring.
 whosoeuer therefore sweareth by the altar sweareth by it and by all things thereon.
 and whosoeuer sweareth by the temple sweareth by it and by hym that dwelleth therein.
 and he that sweareth by heauen sweareth by the throne of god by him that sitteth thereon.
 wo be to you scribes and pharises hypocrites.
 for ye tythe mynt and annyse and commyn and leaue the weightier matters of the law as iudgement and mercie and fidelitie.
 these oght ye to haue done not to haue left the other.
 ye blinde guides whiche straine out a gnatte and swalow a camel.
 wo be to you scribes and pharises hypocrites.
 for ye make cleane the vtter side of the cup of the platter.
 but within thei are ful of briberie and excesse.
 thou blinde pharise clense first the inside of the cup and platter that the outside of them may be cleane also.
 wo be to you scribes and pharises hypocrites.
 for ye are like vnto whited tombes which appeare beautiful outwarde but are within ful of dead mens bones and of all filthines.
 so are ye also.
 for outwarde ye appeare righteous vnto men but within ye are ful of hypocrisie and iniquitie.
 wo be vnto you scribes and pharises hypocrites.
 for ye buylde the tombes of the prophetes and garnish the sepulchres of the righteous and say if we had bene in the dayes of our fathers we wolde not haue bene parteners with them in the blood of the prophetes.
 so them ye be witnesses vnto yourselues that ye are the children of them that murthered the prophetes.
 fulfil ye also the measure of your fathers.
 o serpents the generacion of viperes how shulde ye escape the damnacion of hel.
 wherefore beholde i send vnto you prophetes and wise men and scribes and of them ye shal kil and crucifie.
 and of them shal ye scourge in your synagogues and persecute from citie to citie that vpon you may come all the righteous blood that was shed vpon the earth from the blood of abel the righteous vnto the blood of zacharias the sonne of barachias whome ye slewe betwene the temple and the altar.
 verely i say vnto you all these things shal come vpon this generation.
 ierusalem ierusalem which killest the prophetes and stoned them whiche are sent to thee how often wolde i haue gathered thy children together as the henne gathereth her chickens vnder her wings and ye wolde not.
 beholde your habitacion shalbe left vnto you desolate.
 for i saye vnto you ye shal not se me hence forthe til that ye say blessed is he that cometh in the name of the lord.
 and iesus went out departed from the temple and his disciples came to him and iesus said vnto them se ye not all these things.
 verely i say vnto you there shal not be here left a stone vpon a stone that shal not be cast downe.
 and as he sate vpon the mount of oliues his disciples came vnto him a parte saying.
 tell vs when these things shalbe and what signe shalbe of thy comming and of the end of the worlde.
 and iesus answered and said vnto them take hede that no man deceiue you.
 for manie shal come in my name saying i am christ and shal deceiue manie.
 and ye shal heare of warres and rumors of warres.
 se that ye be not troubled.
 for all these things must come to passe but the end is not yet.
 for nacion shal rise against nacion and realme againste realme and there shalbe pestilence and famine and earth quakes in diuers places.
 al these are but the beginning of sorowes.
 then shall they deliuer you vp to be afflicted and shall kill you and ye shalbe hated of all nacions for my names sake.
 and then shal manie be offende shal betray one another and shal hate one another.
 and manie false prophetes shall arise and shal deceiue manie.
 and because iniquitie shalbe increased the loue of manie shalbe colde.
 but he that endureth to the end he shalbe saued.
 and thys gospell of the kingdome shalbe preached through the whole worlde for a witnes vnto all nacions and then shall the ende come.
 when ye therefore shal se the abomination of desolation spoken of by daniel the prophet standing in the holie place let him that readeth consider it.
 then let them which be in iudea flee into the mountaines.
 let him which is on the house top not come downe to fetch anie thing out of his house.
 and he that is in the field let not him returne backe to fetch his clothes.
 and wo shalbe to them that are with childe and to them that giue sucke in those dayes.
 but pray that your flight be not in the winter nether on the sabbath day.
 for then shalbe great tribulation suche as was not from the beginnyng of the worlde to this time nor shalbe.
 and except those daies shuld be shortned there shulde no flesh be saued.
 but for the electes sake those dayes shalbe shortened.
 then if anie shal say vnto you lo here is christ or there beleue it not.
 for there shal arise false christs and false prophetes and shal shewe great signes and wonders so that if it were possible they shulde deceiue the verie elect.
 beholde i haue tolde you before.
 wherefore if they shal say vnto you beholde he is in the desert go not forthe beholde he is in the secret places beleue it not for as the lightning cometh out of the east and shineth into the west so shal also the comming of the sonne of man be.
 for wheresoeuer a dead carkeis is thither wil the egles resort.
 and immediatly after the tribulations of those dayes shal the sunne be darkened and the moone shal not giue her light and the starres shal fall from heauen the powers of heauen shalbe shaken.
 and then shal appeare the signe of the sonne of man in heauen.
 then shal all the kinreds of the earth mourne they shal se the sonne of man come in the cloudes of heauen with power and great glorie.
 and he shal send his angels with a great sounde of a trumpet and they shal gather together his elect from the foure windes from the one end of the heauen vnto the other.
 now learne the parable of the figge tre.
 when her bough is yet tender it bringeth forthe leaues ye knowe that sommer is nere.
 so like wise ye when ye se all these things knowe that the kingdome of god is nere euen at the dores.
 verely i say vnto you this generation shal not passe til all these things be done.
 heauen and earth shal passe away.
 but my wordes shal not passe away.
 but of that day and houre knoweth no man no not the angels of heauen but my father onely.
 but as the dayes of noe were so like wise shal the comming of the sonne of man be.
 for as in the dayes before the flood they did eat and drinke mary and giue in mariage vnto the day that noe entred into the arke and knewe nothing til the flood came toke them all awaye so shal also the comming of the sonne of man be.
 then two men shalbe in the fields the one shalbe receiued the other shalbe refused.
 two women shalbe grindring at the mil.
 the one shalbe receiued and the other shalbe refused.
 wake therefore.
 for ye knowe not what houre your master wil come of this be sure that if the good man of the house knewe at what watche the thief wold come he wolde surely watche and not suffre his house to be digged through.
 therefore be ye also readie.
 for in the houre that ye thinke not wil the sonne of man come.
 who then is a faithful seruant and wise whome his master hathe made ruler ouer his householde to giue them meat in season.
 blessed is that seruant whome his master when he cometh shal finde so doing.
 verely i say vnto you he shal make him ruler ouer all his goods.
 but if that euil seruant shal say in his heart my master doeth deferre his comming and begin to smite his felowes and to eat and to drinke with the drunken that seruants master wil come in a day when he loketh not for him and in an houre that he is not ware of and wil cut him of and giue him his portion with hypocrites.
 there shalbe weping and gnasshing of teeth.
 then the kingdome of heauen shalbe likened vnto ten virgins which toke their lampes and went to mete the bridegrome.
 and fiue of them were wise and fiue foolish.
 the foolish toke their lampes but toke none oyle with them.
 but the wise toke oyle in their vessels with their lampes.
 now while the bridegrome taryed long all slombred and slept.
 and and at midnight there was a crye made beholde the bridegrome cometh.
 go out to mete him.
 then all those virgins arose and trimmed their lampes.
 and the foolish said to the wise giue vs of your oyle for our lampes are out.
 but the wise answered saying we feare lest there wil not be ynough for vs and you.
 but go ye rather to them that sel and bie for your selues.
 and while they went to bie the bridegrome came.
 and they that were readie went in with him to the wedding the gate was shut.
 afterwardes came also the other virgins saying lord lord open to vs.
 but he answered and said verely i say vnto you i knowe you not.
 watche therefore.
 for ye knowe nether the day nor the houre when the sonne of man wil come.
 for the kingdome of heauen is as a man that going into a strange countrey called his seruants and deliuered to them his goods.
 and vnto one he gaue fiue talents and to another two and to another one to euerie man after his owne habilitie and straight way went from home.
 then he that had receiued the fiue talents went and occupied with them and gained other fiue talents.
 like wise also he that receiued two he also gained other two.
 but he that receiued that one went and digged it the earth and hid his masters money.
 but after a long season the master of those seruants came and rekened with them.
 then came he that had receiued fiue talents and broght other fiue talents saying master thou deliueredst vnto me fiue talents.
 behold i haue gained with them other fiue talents.
 then his master said vnto him it is wel done good seruant and faithful thou hast bene faithful in litle i wil make thee ruler ouer much.
 entre in into thy masters ioy.
 also he that had receiued two talents came and said master thou deliueredst vnto me two talents.
 beholde i haue gained two other talents them.
 his master said vnto him it is wel done good seruant and faithful thou hast bene faithful in litle i wil make thee ruler ouer muche.
 enter into thy masters ioye.
 then he which had receiued the one talent came and said master i knewe that thou wast an hard man which reapest where thou sowedst not and gatherest where thou strawedst not.
 i was therefore afraide and went and hid thy talent in the earth.
 beholde thou hast thine owne.
 and his master answered and said vnto him thou euil seruant slouthful thou knowest that i reap where i sowed not and gather where i strawed not.
 thou oghtest therefore to haue put my money to the exchangers and then at my comming shulde i haue receiued mine owne with vantage.
 take therefore the talent from him and giue it vnto him which hathe ten talents.
 for vnto euerie man that hathe it shal be giuen and he shal haue abundance and from him that hathe not euen that he hathe shalbe taken away.
 cast therefore that vnprofitable seruant into vtter darkenes.
 there shalbe weping and gnasshing of teeth.
 and when the sonne of man cometh in his glorie and all the holie angels with him then shal he sit vpon the throne of his glorie.
 and before him shalbe gathered all nacions and he shal separate them one from another as a shepherde separateth the shepe from the goates.
 and he shal set the shepe on his right hand and the goates on the left.
 then shal the king say to them on his right hand come ye blessed of my father inherite ye the kingdome prepared for you from the fundations of the worlde.
 for i was an hungred and ye gaue me meat.
 i thursted and ye gaue me drinke.
 i was a stranger and ye lodged me.
 i was naked and ye clothed me i was sicke and ye visited me.
 i was in prison and ye came vnto me.
 then shal the righteous answere him saying lord when sawe we thee an hungred and fed thee.
 or a thurst and gaue thee drinke.
 and when sawe we thee a stranger and lodged thee.
 or naked and clothed thee.
 or when sawe we thee sicke or in prison and came vnto thee.
 and the king shal answere and say vnto them.
 verely i say vnto you in as muche as ye haue done it vnto one of the least of these my brethren ye haue done it to me.
 then shal he say vnto them on the left hand departe from me ye cursed into euerlasting fyre which is prepared for the deuil and his angels.
 for i was an hungred and ye gaue me no meat.
 i thursted and ye gaue me no drinke.
 i was a stranger and ye lodged me not.
 i was naked and ye clothed me not.
 sicke and in prison and ye visited me not.
 then shal they also answere him saying lord when saw we thee an hungred or a thurst or a stranger or naked or sicke or in prison and did not minister vnto thee.
 then shal he answer them and say verely isai vnto you in as muche as ye did it not to one of the least of these ye did it not to me.
 and these shal go into euerlasting paine and the righteous into life eternal.
 and it came to passe when iesus had finished all these sayings he said vnto his disciples.
 ye knowe that within two dayes is the passeouer and the sonne of man shalbe deliuered to be crucified.
 then assembled together the chief priests and the scribes and the elders of the people into the hall of the high priest called caiaphas.
 and consulted how they might take iesus by subtilitie and kill him.
 but they said not on the feast day lest anie vprore be among the people.
 and when iesus was in bethania in the house of simon the leper there came vnto him a woman which had a boxe of verie costel eointement and powred it on his head as he sate at the table.
 and when his disciples sawe it thei had indignation saying what neded this waste.
 for this ointment might haue bene solde for muche and bene giuen to the poore.
 and iesus knowing it said vnto them why trouble ye the woman.
 for she hathe wroght a good worke vpon me.
 for ye haue the poore alwayes with you but me shal ye not haue alwayes.
 for in that she powred this ointment on my bodie she did it to burye me.
 verely i say vnto you wheresoeuer this gospel shalbe preached throughout all the worlde there shal also this that she hathe done be spoken of for a memorial of her.
 then one of the twelue called iudas iscariot went vnto the chief priests and said what wil ye giue and i wil deliuer him vnto you.
 and they appointed vnto him thirtie pieces of siluer.
 and from that time he soght opportunitie to betraye him.
 now on the first day of the feast of vnleauened bread the disciples came to iesus saying vnto him where wilt thou that we prepare for thee to eat the passeouer.
 and he said go into the citie to suche a man and say to him the master saith my time is at hand.
 i wil kepe the passeouer at thine house with my disciples.
 and the disciples did as iesus had giuen them charge and made ready the passeouer.
 so when euen the was come he sate downe with the twelue.
 and as they did eat he said verely i say vnto you that one of you shal betraye me.
 and they were exceading sorowful and began euerie one of them to say vnto him is it i master.
 and he answered and said he that dippeth his hand with me in the dish he shal betraye me.
 surely the sonne of man goeth his way as it is written of him.
 but wo be to man by whome the sonne of men is betrayed it had bene good for that man if he had neuer bene borne.
 then iudas which betrayed him answered said is it i master.
 he said vnto him hast said it.
 and as they did eat iesus toke the bread and when he had giuen thankes he brake it and gaue it to the disciples and said take eat.
 this is my bodie.
 also he toke the cup and when he had giuen thankes he gaue it them saying drinke ye all of it.
 for this is my blood of the newe testament that is shed for manie for the remission of sinnes.
 i say vnto you that i wil not drinke henceforthe of this frute of the vine vntil that day when i shal drinke it newe with you in my fathers kingdome.
 and when they had sung a psalme they went out into the mount of oliues.
 then said iesus vnto them all ye shal be offended by me this night.
 for it is written i wil smite the shepherd and the shepe of the flocke shalbe scattred.
 but after i am risen againe i wil go before you into galile.
 but peter answered and said vnto him thogh that all men shulde be offended by thee yet wil i neuer be offended.
 iesus said vnto him verely i say vnto thee that this night before the cocke crowe thou shalt denie me thrise.
 peter said vnto him thogh i shulde dye with thee yet wil i not denie thee.
 like wise also said all the disciples.
 then went iesus with them into a place whiche is called gethsemane and said vnto his disciples sit ye here while i go and pray yonder.
 and he toke peter and the two sonnes of zebedeus and began to waxe sorowful grieuously troubled.
 then said iesus vnto them my soule is verie heauie euen vnto the death.
 tarie ye here and watche with me.
 so he went a litle further and fel on his face and prayed saying o my father if it be possible let this cup passe from me.
 neuertheles not as i wil but as thou wilt.
 after he came vnto the disciples founde them a slepe and said to peter what.
 colde ye not watche with me one houre.
 watch and pray that ye enter not into tentation.
 the spirit in dede is readie but the flesh is weake.
 againe went away the seconde time and prayed saying o my father if this cup can not passe away from me but that i muste it thy wil be done.
 and he came and founde them a slepe againe.
 for their eyes were heauie.
 so he left them and went away againe and the third time saying the same .
 then came he to his disciples and said vnto them slepe henceforthe take your rest.
 beholde the houre is at hand and the sonne of man is giuen into the hands of sinners.
 rise let vs go.
 beholde he is at hand that betrayeth me.
 and while he yet spake lo iudas one of the twelue came and with him a great multitude with swordes and staues from the high priests and elders of the people.
 now he that betrayed him had giuen them a token saying whomesoeuer i shal kisse that is he lay holde on his.
 and forthe with he came to iesus and said god saue thee master and kissed him.
 then iesus said vnto him friend wherefore art thou come.
 then came they and laid hands on iesus and him.
 and beholde one of them whiche were with iesus stretched out his hand drewe his sworde and stroke a seruant of the high priest and smote of his eare.
 then said iesus vnto him put vp thy sword into his place.
 for all that take the sword with the sworde.
 ether thinkest thou that i can not now pray to my father and he wil giue me mo legions of angels.
 how then shulde the scriptures be fulfilled which say that it must be so.
 the same houre said iesus to the multitude ye become out as it were against a thief with swordes and staues to take me.
 i sate daily teaching in the temple among you ye toke me not.
 but all this was done that the scriptures of the prophetes might be fulfilled.
 then all the disciples forsoke him and fled.
 and they toke iesus and led him to caiaphas the hie priest where the scribes and the elders were assembled.
 and peter followed him a farre of vnto the hie priests hall and went in and sate with the seruants to se the end.
 now the chief priests and the elders and all the whole council soght false witnes against iesus to put him to death.
 but they founde none and thogh many false witnesses came yet founde they none.
 but at the last came two false witnesses and said this man said i can destroy the temple of god and buylde it in thre dayes.
 then the chief priest arose and said to him answerest thou nothing.
 what is the matter that these men witnes against thee.
 but iesus helde his peace.
 then the chief priest answered and said to him i charge thee by the liuing god that thou tell vs if thou be the christ the sonne of god.
 iesus said to him thou hast said it.
 neuertheles i say vnto you hereafter shal ye se the sonne of man sitting at the right hand of the power of god and come in the cloudes of the heauen.
 then the hie priest rent his clothes saying he hathe blasphemed.
 what haue we any more nede of witnesses.
 beholde now ye haue heard his blasphemie.
 what thinke ye.
 they answered and said he is worthie to dye.
 then spat they in his face and buffeted him.
 other smote him with their roddes saying prophecie to vs christ who is he that smote thee.
 peter sate without in the hall.
 and a maide came to him saying thou also wast with iesus of galile.
 but he denied before them all saying i wot not what thou saist.
 and when he went out into the porche another maide sawe him and said vnto them that were there this man was also with iesus of nazaret.
 and againe he denyedwith an othe saying i knowe not the man.
 so after a while came vnto him thei that stode by and said vnto peter surely thou art also one of them.
 for euen thy speache bewrayeth thee.
 then began he to curse him self and to sweare saying i knowe not the man.
 and immediatly the cocke crewe.
 then peter remembred the wordes of iesus which had said vnto him before the cocke crowe thou shalt deny me thrise.
 so he went out and wept bitterly.
 when the morning was come all the chief priests and the elders of the people toke counsel against iesus to put him to death.
 and led him away bounde and deliuered him vnto pontius pilate the gouernour.
 then when iudas which betrayed him sawe that he was condemned he repented him self broght againe the thirtie pieces of siluer to the chief priests and elders saying i haue sinned betraying the innocent blood.
 but they said what is that to vs.
 se thou to it.
 and when he had cast downe the siluer pieces in the temple he departed and went and hanged him self.
 and the chief priests toke the siluer pieces and said it is not lawful for vs to put them into the treasure because it is the price of blood.
 and they toke counsel and boght with them a potters field for the buryal of strangers.
 wherefore that field is called the field of blood vntil this day.
 then was fulfilled that which was spoken by ieremias the prophet saying and they toke thirtie siluer pieces the price of him that was valued whome they of the children of israel valued.
 and thei gaue them for the potters field as the lord appointed me and iesus stode before the gouernour the gouernour asked him saying art thou the king of the iewes.
 iesus said vnto him thou saist it.
 and when he was accused of the chief priests and elders he answered nothing.
 then said pilate vnto him hearest thou not how many things they laye against thee.
 but he answered him not to one worde in so muche that the gouernour marueiled greatly.
 now at the feast the gouernour was wont to deliuer vnto the people a prisoner whome they wolde.
 and they had then a not able prisoner called barabbas.
 when they were then gathered together pilate said vnto them whether wil ye that i let loose vnto you barabbas or iesus which is called christ.
 for he knewewel that for enuie they had deliuered him.
 also when he was set downe vpon the iudgement seat his wife sent to him saying haue thou nothing to do with that man.
 for i haue suffered many things this day in a dreame by reason of him.
 but the chief priests and the elders had persuaded the people that thei shulde aske barabbas and shulde destroy iesus.
 then the gouernour answered and said vnto them whether of the twaine wil ye that i let loose vnto you.
 and they said barrabas.
 pilate said vnto them what shal i do then with iesus whiche is called christ.
 thei all said to him let him be crucified.
 then said the gouernour but what euil hath he done.
 then thei cryed the more saying let him be crucified.
 when pilate sawe that he auailed nothing but that more tumulte was made he toke water and washed his hands before the multitude saying.
 i am innocent of the blood of this iust man.
 loke you to it.
 then answered all the people and said his blood be on vs and on our children.
 thus let he barabbas loose vnto them and scourged iesus and deliuered him to be crucified.
 then the souldiours of the gouernour toke iesus into the commune hall and gathered about him the whole bande.
 and thei stripped him and put vpon him a skarlet robe and platted a crowne of thornes and put it vpon his head and a rede in his right hand and bowed their knees before him and mocked him saying god saue thee king of the iewes and spitted vpon him and toke a rede and smote him on the head.
 thus when they had mocked him they toke the robe from him and put his owne raiment on him and led him away to crucifie him.
 and as they came out they founde a man of cyrene named simon.
 him they compelled to beare his crosse.
 and when they came vnto the place called golgotha that is to say the place of dead mens skulles.
 thei gaue him vineger to drinke mingled with gall.
 and when he had tasted thereof he wolde not drinke.
 and when they had crucified him they parted his garments and did cast lottes that it might be fulfilled whiche was spoken by the prophet they deuided my garments among them and vpon my vesture did cast lottes.
 and they sate and watched him there.
 thei set vp also ouer his head his cause written this is iesvs the king of the iewes.
 and there were two thieues crucified with him one on the right hand and another on the left.
 and they that passed by reuiled him wagging their heads and saying thou that destroyest the temple and buyldest it in thre dayes saue thy self.
 if thou be the sonne of god come downe from the crosse.
 like wise also the hie priests mocking him with the scribes and elders and pharises said he saued others but he can not saue him self.
 if he be the king of israel let him now come downe from the crosse and we wil beleue him.
 he trusteth in god let him deliuer him now if he wil haue him.
 for he said i am the sonne of god.
 that same also the thieues whiche were crucified with him cast in his teeth.
 now from the sixt houre was there darkenes ouer all the land vnto the ninth houre.
 and about the ninth houre iesus cryed with a loude voyce saying eli eli lamasabacthani.
 that is my god my god why hast thou forsaken me.
 and some of them that stode there when thei heard it said this man calleth elias.
 and straight way one of them ran and toke a sponge and filled it with vineger and put it on a rede and gaue him to drinke.
 other said let be.
 let vs se if elias wil come and saue him.
 then iesus cryed againe with a loude voyce and yelded vp the gost.
 and beholde the vaile of the temple was rent in twayne from the top to the bottome and the earth did quake the stones were clouen and the graues did open them selues and many bodies of the sainctes whiche slept arose and came out of the graues after his resurrection and went into the holie citie and appeared vnto many.
 when the centurion and they that were with him watching iesus sawe the earthquake and the things that were done they feared greatly saying truely this was the sonne of god.
 and many women were there beholding him a farre of which had folowed iesus from galile ministring vnto him.
 among whome was marie magdalene marie the mother of iames and ioses the mother of zebedeus sonnes.
 and when the euen was come there came a riche man of arimathea named ioseph who had also him self bene iesus disciple.
 he went to pilate and asked the bodie of iesus.
 then pilate commanded the bodie to be deliuered.
 so ioseph toke the bodie and wrapped it in a cleane linnen cloth and put it in his new tombe which he had hewen out in a rocke rolled a great stone to the dore of the sepulchre departed.
 and there was marie magdalene and the other marie sitting ouer against the sepulchre.
 now the next day that folowed the preparation of the sabbath the hie priests and pharises assembled to pilate.
 and said sir we remember that that deceiuer said while he was yet aliue within thre dayes i wil rise.
 commande therefore that the sepulchre be made sure vntill the third daye lest his disciples come by nyght and steale hym away and say vnto the people he is risen from the dead.
 so shall the laste errour be worse then the first.
 then pilate sayd vnto them ye haue a watche.
 go and make it sure as ye knowe.
 and they wente and made the sepulchre sure with the watche and sealed the stone.
 now in the end of the sabbath when the first day of the weke began to dawn marie magdalene and the other marie came to se the sepulchre.
 and beholde there was a great earth quake for the angel of the lord descended from heauen and came and rolled backe the stone from the dore and sate vpon it.
 and his countenance was like lightning and his raiment white as snowe.
 and for feare of him the kepers were astoniest and became as dead men.
 but the angel answered and said to the women feare ye not.
 for i knowe that ye seke iesus which was crucified.
 he is not here for he is risen as he said.
 come se the place where the lord was laid.
 and go quickely and tell hys disciples that he is risen frome the dead.
 and beholde he goeth before ye into galile.
 there ye shall se him.
 lo i haue tolde you.
 so they departed quickely from the sepulchre with feare and greate ioye and dyd runne to bring his disciples worde.
 and as they went to tell hys disciples beholde iesus also met them saying god saue you.
 and they came and toke him by the fete and worshipped him.
 then said iesus vnto them be not afraied.
 go and tell my brethren that they go into galile and there shal they se me.
 nowe when they were gone beholde some of the watche came into the citie and shewed vnto the hie priests all the thynges that were done.
 and they gathered them together with the elders and toke councel and gaue large money vnto the souldiers.
 saying say his disciples came by night and stole him away while we slept.
 and if the gouernour heare of this we will persuade him and saue you harmeles.
 so they toke the money and did as they were taught.
 and this saying is noised among the iewes vnto this day.
 then the eleuen disciples went into galile into a mountaine where iesus had appointed them.
 and when they sawe hym they worshipped him.
 but some douted.
 and iesus came and spake vnto them saying all power is giuen vnto me in heauen and in earth.
 go therefore and teache all nacions baptizynge them in the name of the father and the sonne and the holie gost.
 teaching them to obserue all things whatsoeuer i haue commanded you.
 and lo i am with you alwaye vntill the end of the worlde 