this is the booke of the generation of iesus christ the sonne of dauid the sonne of abraham.
 abraham begat isaac isaac begat iacob iacob begat iudas and his brethren.
 iudas begat phares and zara of thamar phares begat esrom esrom begat aram.
 aram begat aminadab aminadab begat naasson naasson begat salmon.
 salmon begat boos of rachab boos begat obed of ruth obed begat iesse.
 iesse begat dauid the kyng dauid the kyng begat solomon of her that was the wyfe of vrie.
 solomon begat roboam roboam begat abia abia begat asa.
 asa begat iosaphat iosaphat begat ioram ioram begat ozias.
 ozias begat ioatham ioatham begat achas achas begat ezekias.
 ezekias begat manasses manasses begat amon amon begat iosias.
 iosias begat iacim iacim begat iechonias and his brethren about the tyme they were caryed away to babylon.
 and after they were brought to babylon iechonias begat salathiel salathiel begat zorobabel.
 zorobabel begat abiud abiud begat eliakim eliakim begat azor.
 azor begat sadoc sadoc begat achen achen begat eliud.
 eliud begat eleazar eleazar begat matthan matthan begat iacob.
 iacob begat ioseph the husband of marie of whom was borne iesus that is called christe.
 and so all the generations from abraham to dauid are fourteene generations.
 and from dauid vntyll the carying away into babylon are fourteene generations.
 and from the carying away into babylon vnto christe are fourteene generations.
 the birth of iesus christe was on this wise.
 when as his mother marie was betrouthed to ioseph before they came together she was founde with chylde of the holy ghost.
 then ioseph her husbande beyng a ryghteous man and not wyllyng to make her a publique example was mynded priuily to put her away.
 but whyle he thought these thinges beholde the angell of the lord appeared vnto hym in a dreame saying.
 ioseph thou sonne of dauid feare not to take vnto thee marie thy wife for that which is conceaued in her is of the holy ghost.
 she shall bryng foorth a sonne and thou shalt call his name iesus.
 for he shall saue his people from their sinnes.
 all this was done that it myght be fulfilled which was spoken of the lorde by the prophete saying.
 behold a virgin shalbe with childe and shall bryng foorth a sonne and they shall call his name emmanuel whiche is by interpretation god with vs.
 then ioseph being raysed from slepe dyd as the angel of the lorde had bidden hym and he toke his wyfe.
 and knewe her not tyll she hadde brought foorth her first borne sonne called his name iesus.
 when iesus was borne in bethlehem a citie of iurie in the dayes of herode the kyng.
 beholde there came wise men from the east to hierusalem saying.
 where is he that is borne kyng of iewes.
 for we haue seene his starre in the east and are come to worship hym.
 when herode the kyng had hearde these thynges he was troubled and all the citie of hierusalem with hym.
 and when he hadde gathered all the chiefe priestes and scribes of the people together he demaunded of them where christe shoulde be borne.
 and they saide vnto him.
 at bethlehem in iurie.
 for thus it is written by the prophete.
 and thou bethlehem in the lande of iuda art not the least among the princes of iuda.
 for out of thee shall there come a capitain that shal gouerne my people israel.
 then herode when he had priuilye called the wyse men inquired of them diligently what tyme the starre appeared.
 and he sent them to bethlehem and sayde.
 go and search diligently for the young childe and when ye haue founde hym bryng me worde agayne that i may come and worship hym also.
 when they had hearde the kyng they departed and loe the starre which they sawe in the east went before them tyl it came stoode ouer the place wherin the young chylde was.
 when they sawe the starre they reioyced excedyngly with great ioy.
 and went into the house and founde the young chylde with marie his mother and fell downe and worshypped hym and opened their treasures and presented vnto hym gyftes golde and frankensence and mirre.
 and after they were warned of god in a dreame that they shoulde not go agayne to herode they returned into their owne countrey another way.
 when they were departed beholde the angel of the lord appeared to ioseph in a dreame saying.
 aryse take the young chylde and his mother and flee into egipte and be thou there tyll i bryng thee worde.
 for it wyll come to passe that herode shall seke the young chylde to destroy hym.
 when he arose he toke the young chylde and his mother by nyght and departed into egipt.
 and was there vnto the death of herode that it myght be fulfylled whiche was spoken of the lorde by the prophete saying.
 out of egipte haue i called my sonne.
 then herode when he sawe that he was mocked of the wyse men was excedyng wroth and sent foorth and slew all the chyldren that were in bethlehem and in all the coastes as many as were two yere olde or vnder according to the tyme which he had diligently searched out of the wyse men.
 then was fulfylled that which was spoken by ieremie the prophete saying.
 in rama was there a voyce hearde lamentation wepyng great mournyng rachel weping for her children and woulde not be comforted because they were not.
 but when herode was dead beholde an angel of the lorde appeared to ioseph in a dreame in egipt saying.
 aryse and take the young chylde and his mother and go into the lande of israel.
 for they are dead whiche sought the young chyldes lyfe.
 and he arose toke the young chylde and his mother came into the lande of israel.
 but when he hearde that archelaus dyd reigne in iurie in the rowme of his father herode he was afrayde to go thyther.
 notwithstandyng after he was warned of god in a dreame he turned aside into the parties of galilee and went and dwelt in a citie which is called nazareth that it myght be fulfylled which was spoken by the prophetes.
 he shalbe called a nazarite in those dayes came iohn the baptist preachyng in the wyldernesse of iurie and saying.
 repent for the kingdome of heauen is at hande.
 for this is he of whom it is spoken by the prophete esayas saying.
 the voyce of one crying in the wyldernesse.
 prepare ye the way of the lorde make his pathes strayght.
 this iohn had his rayment of camels heere and a girdle of a skynne about his loynes his meate was locustes and wylde hony.
 then went out to hym hierusalem and all iurie and all the region rounde about iordane and were baptized of hym in iordane confessying their sinnes.
 but when he sawe many of the pharisees and saducees come to his baptisme he sayde vnto them.
 o generation of vipers who hath warned you to flee from the anger to come.
 bryng foorth therefore fruites meete for repentaunce.
 and be not of suche mynde that ye woulde say within your selues we haue abraham to our father.
 for i say vnto you that god is able of these stones to rayse vp chyldren vnto abraham.
 euen now is the axe also put vnto the roote of the trees.
 therefore euery tree which bryngeth not foorth good fruite is hewen downe and cast into the fire.
 i baptize you in water vnto repentaunce.
 but he that shall come after me is mightier then i whose shoes i am not worthy to beare he shall baptize you with the holy ghost and with fire.
 whose fanne is in his hande and he wyll purge his floore and gather his wheate into his garner.
 but wyl burne vp the chaffe with vnquencheable fire.
 then commeth iesus from galilee to iordane vnto iohn to be baptized of hym.
 but iohn forbad hym saying.
 i haue nede to be baptized of thee and commest thou to me.
 iesus aunsweryng sayde vnto hym.
 suffer it to be so nowe.
 for thus it becommeth vs to fulfyll all righteousnes.
 then he suffred hym.
 and iesus when he was baptized came strayghtwaye out of the water and loe the heauens was open vnto hym and iohn sawe the spirite of god descendyng lyke a doue and lyghtyng vpon hym.
 and loe there came a voyce from the heauens saying.
 this is my beloued sonne in whom i am well pleased.
 then was iesus ledde away of the spirite into wyldernesse to be tempted of the deuyll.
 and when he had fasted fourtie dayes and fourtie nightes he was afterwarde an hungred.
 and when the tempter came to hym he sayde.
 if thou be the sonne of god commaunde that these stones be made breade.
 but he aunswered and sayde it is written.
 man shall not lyue by breade only but by euery worde that proceadeth out of the mouth of god.
 then the deuyll taketh hym vp into the holy citie and setteth hym on a pinacle of the temple and saith vnto hym.
 if thou be the sonne of god cast thy selfe downe.
 for it is written.
 he shall geue his angels charge ouer thee with their handes they shall lyft thee vp lest at any tyme thou dashe thy foote agaynst a stone.
 and iesus sayde to hym.
 it is written agayne.
 thou shalt not tempt the lorde thy god.
 agayne the deuyll taketh hym vp into an exceadyng hye mountayne and sheweth hym all the kyngdomes of the worlde and the glorie of them and sayth vnto hym.
 all these wyll i geue thee yf thou wylt fall downe and worshyp me.
 then sayth iesus vnto hym.
 auoyde sathan.
 for it is written.
 thou shalt worshyp the lorde thy god and hym only shalt thou serue.
 then the deuyll leaueth him and beholde the angels came and ministred vnto hym.
 when iesus had hearde that iohn was delyuered vp he departed into galilee and left nazareth and went dwelt in capernaum whiche is a citie vpon the sea coast in the borders of zabulon and nephthalim.
 that it myght be fulfylled whiche was spoken by esayas the prophete saying.
 the lande of zabulon nephthalim by the way of the sea beyonde iordane galilee of the gentiles.
 the people which sate in darknesse sawe great lyght.
 and to them whiche sate in the region and shadowe of death lyght is sprong vp.
 from that tyme iesus began to preache and to saye.
 repent for the kyngdome of heauen is at hande.
 and iesus walkyng by the sea of galilee sawe two brethren simon which was called peter and andrewe his brother castyng a nette into the sea for they were fysshers.
 and he saith vnto them.
 folowe me and i wyl make you fysshers of men.
 and they strayghtwaye lefte their nettes and folowed hym.
 and when he was gone foorth from thence he sawe other two brethren iames the sonne of zebedee iohn his brother in the shippe with zebedee their father mendyng their nettes and he called them.
 and they immediatly left the shippe and their father and folowed hym.
 and iesus went about all galilee teaching in their synagogues and preachyng the gospell of the kingdome and healyng all maner of sicknesse and all maner of disease among the people.
 and his fame spread abrode throughout all syria.
 and they brought vnto hym all sicke people that were taken with diuers diseases and grypynges and them that were possessed with deuyls and those which were lunaticke and those that had the paulsie and he healed them.
 and there folowed him great multitudes of people from galilee and from the ten cities and from hierusalem and from iurie and from the regions that lye beyonde iordane.
 when he saw the multitude he went vp into a mountayne.
 when he was set his disciples came to hym.
 and he opened his mouth taught them saying.
 blessed are the poore in spirite.
 for theirs is the kyngdome of heauen.
 blessed are they that mourne.
 for they shalbe comforted.
 blessed are the meke.
 for they shall inherite the earth.
 blessed are they which do hunger and thirste after righteousnes.
 for they shalbe satisfied.
 blessed are the mercyfull.
 for they shall obteyne mercy.
 blessed are the pure in heart.
 for they shall see god.
 blessed are the peace makers.
 for they shalbe called the chyldren of god.
 blessed are they which suffer persecution for righteousnes sake.
 for theirs is the kyngdome of heauen.
 blessed are ye when men reuye you and persecute you and lying shall say all maner of euyll saying agaynst you for my sake.
 reioyce and be glad.
 for great is your rewarde in heauen.
 for so persecuted they the prophetes whiche were before you.
 ye are the salt of the earth.
 but yf the salt become vnsauery where in shall it be salted.
 it is thencefoorth good for nothing but to be caste out and to be troden vnder foote of men.
 ye are the lyght of the worlde.
 a citie that is set on an hyll can not be hyd.
 neyther do men lyght a candell and put it vnder a busshell.
 but on a candelsticke and it geueth lyght vnto all that are in the house.
 let your lyght so shyne before men that they may see your good workes and glorifie your father whiche is in heauen.
 thynke not that i am come to destroy the lawe or the prophetes.
 i am not come to destroy but to fulfyll.
 for truely i say vnto you tyll heauen and earth passe one iotte or one title of the lawe shall not scape tyll all be fulfylled.
 whosoeuer therfore breaketh one of these least commaundementes and teacheth men so he shalbe called the leaste in the kyngdome of heauen.
 but who so euer doeth and teacheth so the same shalbe called great in the kyngdome of heauen.
 for i say vnto you.
 except your righteousnes excede the righteousnes of the scribes and pharisees ye shall not enter into the kyngdome of heauen.
 ye haue hearde that it was sayde to them of the olde tyme thou shalt not kyll.
 who so euer kylleth shalbe in daunger of iudgement.
 but i say vnto you that who so euer is angry with his brother vnaduisedly shalbe in daunger of iudgement.
 and who so euer shall say vnto his brother racha shalbe in daunger of a councell.
 but whosoeuer shall saye thou foole shalbe in daunger of hell fire.
 therfore if thou bring thy gyft to the aulter and there remembrest that thy brother hath ought agaynst thee.
 leaue there thy gyft before the aulter and go thy way first and be reconciled to thy brother.
 and then come and offer thy gyft.
 agree with thyne aduersarie quicklye whyles thou art in the waye with him.
 lest at any tyme the aduersarie deliuer thee to the iudge and the iudge deliuer thee to the minister and then thou be cast into pryson.
 veryly i say vnto thee thou shalt not come out thence tyll thou hast payde the vtmost farthyng.
 ye haue hearde that it was sayde vnto them of olde tyme.
 thou shalt not commit adultry.
 but i say vnto you that whosoeuer loketh on a woman to luste after her hath committed adultry with her alredy in his heart.
 if thy ryght eye offende thee plucke it out and cast it from thee.
 for better it is vnto thee that one of thy members perishe then that thy whole body should be cast into hell.
 and yf thy ryght hande offende thee cut it of and cast it from thee.
 for better it is vnto thee that one of thy members perishe then that all thy body shoulde be cast into hell.
 it is saide.
 whosoeuer putteth away his wyfe let hym geue her a wrytyng of diuorcement.
 but i say vnto you that whosoeuer doeth put awaye his wyfe except it be for fornication causeth her to commit adultry.
 and whosoeuer maryeth her that is diuorced committeth adultry.
 agayne ye haue hearde that it was sayde vnto them of olde tyme.
 thou shalt not forsweare thy selfe but shalt perfourme vnto the lorde thine othes.
 but i say vnto you.
 sweare not at all neither by heauen for it is gods seate nor by the earth for it is his footestoole neither by hierusalem for it is the citie of the great kyng.
 neither shalt thou sweare by thy head because thou canst not make one heere whyte or blacke.
 but let your communication be yea yea nay nay.
 for whatsoeuer is more then these commeth of euyll.
 ye haue hearde that it is sayde an eye for an eye and a tooth for a tooth.
 but i say vnto you that ye resist not euyll.
 but whosoeuer geueth thee a blowe on thy right cheeke turne to him the other also.
 and yf any man wyll sue thee at the lawe and take away thy coate let him haue thy cloke also.
 and whosoeuer wyll compell thee to go a myle go with hym twayne.
 geue to hym that asketh thee.
 from hym that woulde borowe of thee turne not thou away.
 ye haue heard that it is saide.
 thou shalt loue thy neyghbour hate thyne enemie.
 but i saye vnto you loue your enemies blesse them that curse you do good to them that hate you pray for them which hurt you and persecute you.
 that ye may be the chyldren of your father which is in heauen.
 for he maketh his sonne to aryse on the euyll and on the good and sendeth rayne on the iust and on the vniust.
 for yf ye loue them which loue you what rewarde haue ye.
 do not the publicans also euen the same.
 and yf ye salute or greete your brethren only what singuler thyng do ye.
 do not also the publicans lykewyse.
 ye shall therfore be perfecte euen as your father which is in heauen is perfecte.
 take heede to your almes that ye geue it not in the sight of men to the intente that ye woulde be sene of them or els ye haue no rewarde of your father which is in heauen.
 therefore when thou geuest thyne almes thou shalt not make a trumpet to be blowen before thee as hypocrites do in the synagogues in the streates that they might be esteemed of men.
 verily i say vnto you they haue their reward.
 but when thou doest thyne almes let not thy left hande knowe what thy ryght hande doeth that thyne almes may be in secrete.
 and thy father which seeth in secrete shall rewarde thee openly.
 and when thou prayest thou shalt not be as the hypocrites are.
 for they loue to stande praying in the synagogues and in the corners of the streates that they may be sene of men.
 veryly i say vnto you they haue theyr rewarde.
 but when thou prayest enter into thy chaumber and when thou hast shut thy dore pray to thy father which is in secrete and thy father which seeth in secrete shall rewarde thee openly.
 but when ye pray babble not much as the heathen do.
 for they thynke it wyl come to passe that they shalbe heard for theyr much bablinges sake.
 be not ye therfore lyke vnto them.
 for your father knoweth what thynges ye haue nede of before ye aske of hym.
 after this maner therfore pray ye.
 o our father which art in heauen halowed be thy name.
 let thy kyngdome come.
 thy wyll be done as well in earth as it is in heauen.
 geue vs this day our dayly breade.
 and forgeue vs our dettes as we forgeue our detters.
 and leade vs not into temptation but delyuer vs from euyll.
 for thyne is the kyngdome and the power and the glory for euer.
 amen.
 for yf ye forgeue men theyr trespasses your heauenly father shall also forgeue you.
 but yf ye forgeue not men theyr trespasses.
 no more shall your father forgeue you your trespasses.
 moreouer when ye fast be not of an heauy countenaunce as hypocrites are.
 for they disfigure theyr faces that they myght appeare vnto men to fast.
 veryly i say vnto you they haue theyr rewarde.
 but thou when thou fastest annoynt thyne head and washe thy face.
 that thou appeare not vnto men to fast.
 but vnto thy father which is in secrete and thy father which seeth in secrete shall rewarde thee openly.
 hoorde not vp for your selues treasures vpon earth where the moth and rust doth corrupt and where theeues breake through and steale.
 but laye vp for you treasures in heauen where neyther moth nor rust doth corrupt and where theeues do not breake through nor steale.
 for where your treasure is there wyll your heart be also.
 the lyght of the body is the eye.
 wherfore yf thyne eye be single all thy body shalbe full of lyght.
 but and yf thyne eye be wicked all thy body shalbe ful of darknesse.
 wherfore yf the lyght that is in thee be darknesse howe great is that darknesse.
 no man can serue two maisters.
 for either he shall hate the one loue the other.
 or els leane to the one and dispise the other.
 ye can not serue god and mammon.
 therfore i say vnto you be not carefull for your lyfe what ye shall eate or drynke.
 nor yet for your body what ye shall put on.
 is not the lyfe more worth then meate.
 the body then rayment.
 beholde the fowles of the ayre.
 for they sowe not neither do they reape nor cary into the barnes.
 yet your heauenly father feedeth them.
 are ye not much better then they.
 which of you by takyng of carefull thought can adde one cubite vnto his stature.
 and why care ye for rayment.
 learne of the lylies of the fielde howe they growe.
 they weery not them selues with labour neither do they spinne.
 and yet i say vnto you that euen solomon in all his royaltie was not arayed lyke one of these.
 wherfore yf god so clothe the grasse of the fielde which though it stande to day is to morowe cast into the ouen.
 shall he not much more do the same for you o ye of litle fayth.
 therefore take no thought saying.
 what shall we eate.
 or what shall we drynke.
 or wherewith shall we be clothed.
 for after all these thynges do the gentiles seke.
 for your heauenly father knoweth that ye haue nede of all these thynges.
 but rather seke ye first the kyngdome of god and his ryghteousnesse and all these thynges shalbe ministred vnto you.
 care not then for the morowe.
 for the morowe shall care for it selfe.
 sufficient vnto the day is the euyll therof.
 ivdge not that ye be not iudged.
 for with what iudgement ye iudge ye shalbe iudged.
 and with what measure ye meate it shalbe measured to you agayne.
 why seest thou a mote in thy brothers eye but perceiuest not the beame that is in thyne owne eye.
 or howe sayest thou to thy brother.
 suffer me i wyll plucke out a mote out of thyne eye.
 and beholde a beame is in thyne owne eye.
 thou hypocrite first caste out the beame out of thine owne eye.
 and then shalt thou see clearely to plucke out the mote out of thy brothers eye.
 geue not that which is holy vnto dogges neyther caste ye your pearles before swyne lest they treade them vnder their feete and turning agayne all to rent you.
 aske and it shalbe geuen you.
 seke and ye shall fynde.
 knocke and it shalbe opened vnto you.
 for he that asketh receaueth.
 and he that seketh fyndeth.
 and to hym that knocketh it shalbe opened.
 is there any among you which yf his sonne aske hym bread wyll geue hym a stone.
 or yf he aske fyshe wyll he geue hym a serpent.
 if ye then beyng euyll knowe to geue your chyldren good gyftes.
 howe much more shall your father which is in heauen geue good thynges to them that aske hym.
 therfore all thynges whatsoeuer ye woulde that men shoulde do to you do ye euen so to them.
 for this is the lawe and the prophetes.
 enter in at the strayte gate.
 for wyde is the gate and brode is the way that leadeth to destruction and many there be which go in therat.
 because strayte is the gate and narowe is the way which leadeth vnto lyfe and fewe there be that fynde it.
 beware of false prophetes which come to you in sheepes clothyng.
 but inwardly they are rauenyng woolfes.
 ye shall knowe them by theyr fruites do men gather grapes of thornes.
 or fygges of thystles.
 euen so euery good tree bryngeth foorth good fruite.
 but a corrupt tree bryngeth foorth euyll fruite.
 a good tree can not bryng foorth bad fruite.
 neither can a bad tree bryng foorth good fruite.
 euery tree that bryngeth not foorth good fruite is hewen downe and cast into the fyre.
 wherfore by theyr fruites ye shall knowe them.
 not euery one that sayeth vnto me lorde lorde shall enter into the kyngdome of heauen.
 but he that doeth the wyll of my father which is in heauen.
 many wyll say to me in that day lorde lorde haue we not prophesied thorowe thy name.
 and thorowe thy name haue cast out deuyls.
 done many great workes thorowe thy name.
 and then wyll i confesse vnto them i neuer knewe you.
 depart from me ye that worke iniquitie.
 therfore whosoeuer heareth of me these sayinges and doeth the same i wyll lyken hym vnto a wyse man which buylt his house vpon a rocke.
 and the rayne descended and the fluddes came and the wyndes blewe and beat vpon that house and it fell not because it was grounded on a rocke.
 and euery one that heareth of me these sayinges and doeth them not shalbe lykened vnto a foolyshe man which buylt his house vpon the sande.
 and the rayne descended and the fluddes came and the wyndes blewe and beat vpon that house and it fell and great was the fall of it.
 and it came to passe that when iesus had ended these sayinges the people were astonied at his doctrine.
 for he taught them as one hauyng power and not as the scribes.
 when he was come downe from the mountayne great multitudes folowed hym.
 and beholde there came a leper and worshipped hym saying.
 lorde yf thou wylt thou canst make me cleane.
 and iesus put foorth his hande and touched hym saying.
 i wyll be thou cleane.
 and immediatlye his leprosie was clensed.
 and iesus sayth vnto hym.
 see thou tell no man but go and shewe thy selfe to the priest and offer the gift that moyses commaunded for a witnes vnto them.
 and when iesus was entred into capernaum there came vnto hym a centurion besechyng hym.
 and saying.
 lorde my seruaunt lyeth at home sicke of the paulsie greeuously payned.
 and iesus sayth.
 when i come i wyll heale hym.
 the centurion aunswered sayde.
 lorde i am not worthy that thou shouldest come vnder my roofe.
 but speake the worde only my seruaunt shalbe healed.
 for i also my selfe am vnder aucthoritie and haue souldiers vnder me.
 and i say to this man go and he goeth.
 and to another come and he commeth.
 and to my seruaunt do this and he doth it.
 when iesus hearde him he marueyled sayde to them that folowed him.
 veryly i say vnto you i haue not founde so great fayth in israel.
 i say vnto you that many shall come from the east and west and shall rest with abraham and isaac iacob in the kyngdome of heauen.
 but the chyldren of the kyngdome shalbe caste out into vtter darcknesse.
 there shalbe wepyng and gnashyng of teeth.
 and iesus sayde vnto the centurion.
 go thy way and as thou hast beleued so be it vnto thee.
 and his seruaunt was healed in the selfe same houre.
 and when iesus was come into peters house he sawe his wyues mother layed and sicke of a feuer.
 and he touched her hande and the feuer left her and she arose and ministred vnto them.
 when the euen was come they brought vnto hym many that were possessed with deuyls and he cast out the spirites with a worde and healed all that were sicke.
 that it myght be fulfylled which was spoken by esayas the prophete saying.
 he toke on hym our infirmities and bare our sicknesses.
 when iesus sawe great multitudes about hym he commaunded that they shoulde go ouer the water.
 and a certayne scribe came sayde vnto hym.
 maister i wyll folowe thee whyther soeuer thou goest.
 and iesus sayth vnto hym.
 the foxes haue holes and the birdes of the ayre haue nestes.
 but the sonne of man hath not where to rest his head.
 and another of the number of his disciples sayde vnto hym.
 lorde suffer me first to go and bury my father.
 but iesus sayde vnto hym.
 folowe me and let the dead bury theyr dead.
 and when he entred into a shippe his disciples folowed hym.
 and beholde there arose a great tempest in the sea in so much that the shippe was couered with waues.
 but he was a slepe.
 and his disciples came to hym and awoke hym saying.
 lorde saue vs we peryshe.
 and he sayth vnto them.
 why are yet fearefull o ye of litle fayth.
 then he arose and rebuked the windes and the sea.
 and there folowed a great calme.
 but the men marueyled saying.
 what maner of man is this that both wyndes and sea obey hym.
 and when he was come to the other syde into the countrey of the gergesenes there met hym two possessed with deuyls which came out of the graues and were very fierce so that no man myght go by that way.
 and beholde they cryed out saying.
 o iesu thou sonne of god what haue we to do with thee.
 art thou come hyther to torment vs before the tyme.
 and there was a good way of from them a hearde of many swyne feedyng.
 so the deuyls besought hym saying.
 yf thou cast vs out suffer vs to go away into the hearde of swyne.
 and he sayde vnto them go.
 then went they out and departed into the hearde of swyne.
 and beholde the whole hearde of swyne russhed headlong into the sea and peryshed in the waters.
 then they that kept them fledde and went theyr wayes into the citie and tolde euery thyng and what was done of the possessed with the deuyls.
 and beholde the whole citie came out to meete iesus.
 and when they sawe hym they besought hym that he woulde depart out of theyr coastes.
 and he entred into a shippe passed ouer came into his owne citie.
 and beholde they brought to him a man sicke of the paulsie lying in a bedde.
 and when iesus sawe the fayth of them he sayde vnto the sicke of the paulsie.
 sonne be of good cheare thy sinnes be forgeuen thee.
 and beholde certayne of the scribes sayde within them selues.
 this man blasphemeth.
 and when iesus saw their thoughtes he sayde.
 wherefore thynke ye euyll in your heartes.
 whether is easyer to say thy sinnes be forgeuen thee.
 or to say aryse and walke.
 but that ye may knowe that the sonne of man hath power to forgeue sinnes in earth then sayde he to the sicke of the paulsie aryse take vp thy bedde and go vnto thyne house.
 and he arose and departed to his house.
 but when the multitudes sawe it they marueyled glorified god which had geuen such power vnto men.
 and as iesus passed foorth from thence he sawe a man named matthewe syttyng at the receipte of custome.
 he sayth vnto hym folowe me.
 and he arose and folowed hym.
 and it came to passe as iesus sate at meate in his house beholde many publicans also and sinners came and sate downe with iesus and his disciples.
 and when the pharisees sawe it they sayde vnto his disciples.
 why eateth your maister with publicans and sinners.
 but when iesus hearde that he sayde vnto them.
 they that be whole nede not the phisition but they that are sicke.
 go ye and learne what that meaneth i wyll haue mercie and not sacrifice.
 for i am not come to call the righteous but sinners to repentaunce.
 then came the disciples of iohn vnto hym saying.
 why do we and the pharisees fast oft but thy disciples fast not.
 and iesus sayde vnto them.
 can the chyldren of the bryde chaumber mourne as long as the brydegrome is with them.
 but the dayes wyll come when the brydegrome shall be taken from them and then shall they fast.
 no man putteth a peece of newe cloth in an olde garment.
 for then the peece taketh away somethyng from the garment and the rent is made worse.
 neither do men put newe wine into olde vessels.
 els the vessels breake and the wyne runneth out and the vessels peryshe.
 but they put newe wyne into newe vessels and both are preserued together.
 whyle he spake these thynges vnto them beholde there came a certayne ruler and worshypped hym saying.
 my daughter is euen nowe dead but come and lay thy hande vpon her and she shall lyue.
 and iesus arose and folowed hym and so dyd his disciples.
 and beholde a woman which was diseased with an issue of blood twelue yeres came behynde hym and touched the hemme of his vesture.
 for she sayde within her selfe.
 if i may touche but euen his vesture only i shalbe safe.
 but iesus turned hym about and when he sawe her he saide.
 daughter be of good comfort thy faith hath made thee safe.
 and the woman was made whole from that same houre.
 and when iesus came into the rulers house and sawe the minstrels and the people makyng a noyse he sayde vnto them.
 geue place for the maide is not dead but slepeth.
 and they laughed hym to scorne.
 but when the people were put foorth he went in and toke her by the hande and the mayde arose.
 and the fame of this went abrode into all that lande.
 and when iesus departed thence two blynde men folowed hym crying and saying.
 o thou sonne of dauid haue mercy on vs.
 and when he was come into the house the blynde came to hym.
 and iesus sayth vnto them.
 beleue ye that i am able to do this.
 they sayde vnto hym yea lorde.
 then touched he their eyes saying.
 accordyng to your fayth be it vnto you.
 and their eyes were opened.
 and iesus straytly charged them saying.
 see that no man knowe of it.
 but they when they were departed spread abrode his name in all that lande.
 as they went out beholde they brought to him a dumbe man possessed with a deuyll.
 and when the deuyll was cast out the dumbe spake and the multitudes marueyled saying that it was neuer so seene in israel.
 but the pharisees sayde.
 he casteth out deuils through the prince of deuils.
 and iesus went about all cities and townes teachyng in their synagogues and preachyng the gospell of the kyngdome and healyng euery sicknesse and euery disease among the people.
 but when he sawe the multitudes he was moued with compassion on them because they were destitute and scattered abrode euen as sheepe hauing no shephearde.
 then sayth he vnto his disciples.
 the haruest truely is plenteous but the labourers are fewe.
 pray ye therfore the lorde of the haruest that he wyl thrust foorth labourers into the haruest.
 and when he had called his twelue disciples vnto hym he gaue them power agaynst vncleane spirites to cast them out and to heale all maner of sicknesse and all maner of disease.
 the names of the twelue apostles are these.
 the first simon whiche is called peter and andrewe his brother iames the sonne of zebedee iohn his brother philip bartholomewe thomas and matthewe which had ben a publicane iames the sonne of alphee lebbeus whose surname was taddeus simon the cananite iudas iscariot which also betrayed hym.
 iesus sent foorth these twelue whom he commaunded saying.
 go not into the way of the gentiles and into the citie of the samaritanes enter ye not.
 but go rather to the lost sheepe of the house of israel.
 as ye go preache saying.
 the kyngdome of heauen is at hande.
 heale the sicke cleanse the lepers rayse the dead cast out deuyls.
 freely ye haue receaued freely geue.
 possesse not golde nor syluer nor brasse in your purses nor yet scrippe towardes your iourney neither two coates neither shoes nor yet a staffe.
 for the workman is worthy of his meate.
 but to whatsoeuer citie or towne ye shall come inquire who is worthy in it and there abyde tyll ye go thence.
 and when ye come into an house salute the same.
 and if the house be worthy let your peace come vpon it.
 but if it be not worthy let your peace returne to you again.
 and whosoeuer shal not receaue you nor wyll heare your preachyng.
 when ye depart out of that house or that citie shake of the dust of your feete.
 veryly i say vnto you it shalbe easier for the lande of the sodomites and gomorreans in the day of iudgement then for that citie.
 beholde i sende you foorth as sheepe in the middest of woolfes.
 be ye therfore wyse as serpentes and harmelesse as doues.
 but beware of men.
 for they shall delyuer you vp to the councels and shal scourge you in their synagogues.
 and ye shalbe brought to the head rulers and kynges for my sake in witnesse to them and to the gentiles.
 but when they delyuer you vp take ye no thought how or what ye shal speake.
 for it shalbe geuen you euen in that same houre what ye shall speake.
 for it is not ye that speake but the spirite of your father which speaketh in you.
 the brother shall delyuer vp the brother to death and the father the sonne the chyldren shall ryse agaynst their fathers and mothers and shall but them to death.
 and ye shalbe hated of all men for my names sake.
 but he that endureth to the ende shalbe saued.
 but when they persecute you in this citie flee ye into another.
 for verily i say vnto you ye shall not ende all the cities of israel tyll the sonne of man be come.
 the disciple is not aboue the maister nor the seruaunt aboue his lorde.
 it is enough for the disciple that he be as his maister is.
 and that the seruaunt be as his lorde is.
 if they haue called the lorde of the house beelzebub.
 howe much more shall they call them of his householde so.
 feare them not therfore.
 for there is nothing close that shal not be opened.
 nothing hyd that shall not be knowen.
 what i tell you in darknesse that speake ye in lyght.
 and what ye heare in the eare that preach ye on the houses.
 and feare ye not them which kyll the body but are not able to kyll the soule.
 but rather feare hym which is able to destroy both soule and body in hell.
 are not two litle sparowes solde for a farthyng.
 and one of them shall not light on the grounde without your father.
 yea euen all the heeres of your head are numbred.
 feare ye not therefore ye are of more value then many sparowes.
 euery one therfore that shall confesse me before men hym wyll i confesse also before my father which is in heauens.
 but whosoeuer shall denye me before men hym wyll i also denye before my father which is in heauens.
 thinke not that i am come to sende peace into the earth.
 i came not to sende peace but a sworde.
 for i am come to set a man at varyaunce agaynst his father the daughter agaynst her mother and the daughter in lawe agaynst her mother in lawe.
 and a mans foes shalbe they of his owne householde.
 he that loueth father or mother more then me is not worthy of me.
 and he that loueth sonne or daughter more then me is not worthy of me.
 and he that taketh not his crosse foloweth me is not worthy of me.
 he that findeth his life shall lose it.
 and he that loseth his lyfe for my sake shall fynde it.
 he that receaueth you receaueth me.
 he that receaueth me receaueth hym that sent me.
 he that receaueth a prophete in the name of a prophete shall receaue a prophetes rewarde.
 and he that receaueth a ryghteous man in the name of a ryghteous man shall receaue a ryghteous mans rewarde.
 and whosoeuer shall geue vnto one of these litle ones to drynke a cuppe of colde water only in the name of a disciple veryly i say vnto you he shall not lose his rewarde.
 and it came to passe that when iesus had made an ende of commaundyng his twelue disciples he departed thence to teache and to preache in their cities.
 when iohn being in prison heard the workes of christe he sent two of his disciples and sayde vnto him.
 art thou he that shoulde come.
 or do we loke for another.
 iesus aunswered and sayd vnto them.
 go and shewe iohn agayne what ye haue hearde and seene.
 the blinde receaue their sight the halt do walke the lepers are cleansed and the deafe heare the dead are raised vp and the poore receaue the gospell.
 and happy is he that is not offended in me.
 and as they departed iesus began to say vnto the multitude concerning iohn.
 what went ye out into the wildernesse to see.
 a reede shaken with the winde.
 or what went ye out for to see.
 a man clothed in soft rayment.
 beholde they that weare soft clothyng are in kinges houses.
 but what went ye out for to see.
 a prophete.
 yea i say vnto you and more then a prophete.
 for this is he of whom it is written.
 beholde i sende my messenger before thy face which shall prepare thy way before thee.
 veryly i say vnto you among them that are borne of women arose not a greater then iohn the baptist.
 notwithstandyng he that is lesse in the kingdome of heauen is greater then he.
 from the dayes of iohn the baptist vntyll nowe the kingdome of heauen suffereth violence the violent plucke it vnto them.
 for all the prophetes and the lawe it selfe prophecied vnto iohn.
 and if ye wyll receaue it this is elias which was for to come.
 he that hath eares to heare let him heare.
 but whervnto shall i liken this generation.
 it is like vnto litle children which sit in the markettes and call vnto their felowes and say.
 we haue pyped vnto you and ye haue not daunsed.
 we haue mourned vnto you and ye haue not sorowed.
 for iohn came neither eatyng nor drinking and they say he hath the deuil.
 the sonne of man came eatyng and drinking and they say beholde a glutton and an vnmeasurable drinker of wine and a friende vnto publicans sinners.
 and wisdome is iustified of her children.
 then began he to vpbrayd the cities which most of his mightie workes were done in because they repented not.
 wo vnto thee chorazin wo vnto thee bethsaida.
 for if the mightie workes which were shewed in you had ben done in tyre or sidon they had repented long ago in sackcloth and asshes.
 neuerthelesse i say vnto you it shalbe easier for tyre and sidon at the day of iudgement then for you.
 and thou capernaum which art lift vp vnto heauen shalt be brought downe to hell.
 for if the mightie workes which haue ben done in thee had ben done among them of sodome they had remayned vntyll this day.
 neuerthelesse i say vnto you that it shalbe easier for the lande of sodome in the day of iudgement then for thee.
 at that tyme iesus aunswered and sayde.
 i thanke thee o father lorde of heauen and earth because thou hast hid these thinges from the wise and prudent and hast shewed them vnto babes.
 euen so it is o father for so was it thy good pleasure.
 all thinges are geuen vnto me of my father.
 and no man knoweth the sonne but the father neither knoweth any man the father saue the sonne and he to whomsoeuer the sonne wyll open him.
 come vnto me all ye that labour sore and are laden and i wyll ease you.
 take my yoke vpon you and learne of me for i am meeke lowly in heart.
 and ye shall finde rest vnto your soules.
 for my yoke is easie and my burthen is lyght.
 at that tyme iesus went on the sabbath dayes through the corne and his disciples were an hungred and began to plucke the eares of corne to eate.
 but when the pharisees sawe it they sayde vnto hym.
 beholde thy disciples do that which is not lawfull to do vpon the sabbath day.
 but he sayde vnto them.
 haue ye not read what dauid did when he was an hungred and they that were with him.
 howe he entred into the house of god and did eate the shew bread which was not lawfull for hym to eate neither for them which were with hym but only for the priestes.
 or haue ye not read in the lawe howe that on the sabbath dayes the priestes in the temple prophane the sabbath and are blamelesse.
 but i say vnto you that in this place is one greater then the temple.
 wherfore if ye wist what this meaneth i will mercie not sacrifice.
 ye woulde not haue condempned the giltlesse.
 for the sonne of man also is lorde euen of the sabbath day.
 and he departed thence and went into their synagogue and beholde there was a man which had his hande dryed vp and they asked him saying.
 is it lawfull to heale vpon the sabbath dayes.
 that they might accuse him.
 and he sayde vnto them.
 what man of you wyll there be that shall haue a sheepe if it fall into a pit on the sabbath day wyll he not take holde of it and lift it out.
 howe much more then is a man better then a sheepe.
 wherfore it is lawfull to do a good deede on the sabbath dayes.
 then saith he to the man stretch foorth thy hande.
 and he stretched it foorth.
 and it was made whole like as the other.
 then the pharisees went out and helde a counsayle agaynst him howe they might destroy hym.
 but when iesus knewe it he departed thence.
 and great multitudes folowed him and he healed them all and charged them that they shoulde not make him knowen.
 that it might be fulfylled which was spoken by esaias the prophete saying.
 beholde my childe whom i haue chosen my beloued in whom my soule well delighteth.
 i wyll put my spirite vpon him and he shall shewe iudgement to the gentiles.
 he shall not striue nor crye neither shal any man heare his voyce in the streetes.
 a bruised reede shall he not breake and smokyng flaxe shall he not quenche tyll he sende foorth iudgement vnto victorie.
 and in his name shall the gentiles trust.
 then was brought to him one possessed with a deuyll blinde and dumbe.
 and he healed him insomuch that the blinde and dumbe both spake and sawe.
 and all the people were amased and sayde.
 is not this that sonne of dauid.
 but when the pharisees hearde it they sayde.
 this felowe driueth the deuils no otherwise out but by beelzebub the prince of the deuils.
 but when iesus knew their thoughtes he sayde vnto them euery kingdome deuided agaynst it selfe shalbe brought to naught.
 and euery citie or house deuided agaynst it selfe shall not stande.
 and if satan cast out satan then is he deuided agaynst him selfe.
 howe shall then his kingdome endure.
 also if i by beelzebub cast out deuils by whom do your children cast them out.
 therfore they shalbe your iudges.
 but if i cast out the deuils by the spirite of god.
 then is the kingdome of god come vpon you.
 or els howe can one enter into a strong mans house spoyle his goodes except he first binde the strong man and then spoyle his house.
 he that is not with me is agaynst me.
 and he that gathereth not with me scattereth abrode.
 wherfore i say vnto you all maner of sinne and blasphemy shalbe forgeuen vnto men but the blasphemy agaynst the spirite shall not be forgeuen vnto men.
 and whosoeuer speaketh a worde agaynst the sonne of man it shalbe forgeuen hym.
 but whosoeuer speaketh agaynst the holy ghost it shall not be forgeuen hym neither in this worlde neither in the worlde to come.
 either make the tree good and his fruite good.
 or els make the tree euyll and his fruite euyll.
 for the tree is knowen by his fruite.
 o generation of vipers howe can ye speake good thynges when ye your selues are euyll.
 for out of the aboundaunce of the heart the mouth speaketh.
 a good man out of the good treasure of the heart bryngeth foorth good thynges.
 and an euyll man out of euyll treasure bryngeth foorth euyll thynges.
 but i say vnto you of euery idell worde that men shall speake they shall geue accompt therof in the day of iudgment.
 for of thy wordes thou shalt be iustified.
 and of thy wordes thou shalt be condemned.
 then certayne of the scribes and of the pharisees aunswered hym saying.
 maister we wyl see a signe of thee.
 but he aunswered and sayde to them.
 the euyll and adulterous generation seketh a signe and there shall no signe be geuen to it but the signe of the prophete ionas.
 for as ionas was three dayes and three nyghtes in the whales belly.
 so shall the sonne of man be three dayes and three nyghtes in the heart of the earth.
 the men of niniue shall ryse in the iudgement with this nanon and condemne it because they repented at the preachyng of ionas.
 and beholde here is one greater then ionas.
 the queene of the south shall ryse in the iudgement with this generation and shall condemne it.
 for she came from the vtmost partes of the earth to heare the wisdome of solomon.
 and beholde in this place is one greater then solomon.
 when the vncleane spirite is gone out of a man he walketh throughout drye places sekyng rest and fyndeth none.
 then he sayeth.
 i wyll returne into my house from whence i came out.
 and when he is come he fyndeth it emptie swept and garnyshed.
 then goeth he and taketh vnto hym seuen other spirites worse then hym selfe and they enter in and dwell there.
 and the ende of that man is worse then the begynnyng.
 euen so shall it be also vnto this frowarde generation.
 whyle he yet talked to the people beholde his mother and his brethren stoode without desyryng to speake with hym.
 then one sayde vnto hym.
 beholde thy mother and thy brethren stande without desyryng to speake with thee.
 but he aunswered and sayde vnto hym that had tolde hym.
 who is my mother.
 or who are my brethren.
 and he stretched foorth his hande towarde his disciples sayde beholde my mother and my brethren.
 for whosoeuer shall do the wyll of my father which is in heauen the same is my brother sister and mother.
 the same day went iesus out of the house sate by the sea syde.
 and great multitudes were gathered together vnto hym so greatly that he went and sate in a shippe and the whole multitude stoode on the shore.
 and he spake many thynges to them in parables saying.
 beholde the sower went foorth to sowe.
 and when he sowed some seedes fell by the wayes side and the fowles came and deuoured them vp.
 some fell vpon stony places where they had not much earth and anone they sprong vp because they had no depenesse of earth.
 and when the sonne was vp they caught heate and because they had not roote they wythered away.
 agayne some fell among thornes and the thornes sprong vp and choked them.
 but some fell into good grounde and brought foorth fruite some an hundred folde some sixtie folde some thirtie folde.
 who hath eares to heare let hym heare.
 and the disciples came and sayde vnto hym.
 why speakest thou to them by parables.
 he aunswered and sayde vnto them.
 because it is geuen vnto you to knowe the secretes of the kyngdome of heauen but to them it is not geuen.
 for whosoeuer hath to hym shalbe geuen and he shall haue more aboundaunce.
 but whosoeuer hath not from hym shalbe taken away euen that he hath.
 therfore speake i to them in parables.
 because they seeyng see not.
 and hearyng they heare not.
 neither do they vnderstande.
 and in them is fulfylled the prophesie of esaias saying.
 by hearyng ye shall heare and shall not vnderstande and seeyng ye shall see shall not perceaue.
 for this peoples heart is waxed grosse and their eares are dull of hearyng and their eyes haue they closed.
 lest at any tyme they shoulde see with their eyes and heare with their eares and shoulde vnderstande with their heart shoulde conuert that i myght heale them.
 but blessed are your eyes for they see.
 and your eares for they heare.
 veryly i say vnto you that many prophetes and ryghteous men haue desired to see those thynges which ye see and haue not seene.
 and to heare those thynges which ye heare and haue not hearde.
 heare ye therfore the similitude of the sower.
 when one heareth the worde of the kyngdome and vnderstandeth it not then commeth that euyll and catcheth away that which was sowen in his heart.
 this is he which receaued seede by the way syde.
 but he that receaued the seede into stony places the same is he that heareth the worde and anone with ioy receaueth it.
 yet hath he not roote in hym selfe but dureth for a season.
 for when tribulation or persecution aryseth because of the worde by and by he is offended.
 he also that receaued seede into the thornes is he that heareth the worde.
 and the care of this worlde and the disceiptfulnes of ryches choke vp the worde and so is he made vnfruitfull.
 but he that receaued seede into the good grounde is he that heareth the worde and vnderstandeth it which also beareth fruite.
 and bryngeth foorth some an hundred folde some sixtie folde some thirtie folde.
 another parable put he foorth vnto them saying.
 the kyngdome of heauen is likened vnto a man which sowed good seede in his fielde.
 but whyle men slept his enemye came sowed tares among the wheate and went his way.
 but when the blade was sprong vp and had brought foorth fruite then appeared the tares also.
 so the seruauntes of the housholder came and sayde vnto hym.
 sir diddest not thou sowe good seede in thy fielde.
 from whence then hath it tares.
 he sayde vnto them.
 the malicious man hath done this.
 the seruauntes sayde vnto hym.
 wylt thou then that we go and gather them vp.
 but he sayde nay.
 lest whyle ye gather vp the tares ye rote vp also the wheate with them.
 let both growe together vntyll the haruest.
 in tyme of haruest i wyl say to the reapers gather ye together first the tares and bynde them in bundels to burne them.
 but carrie the wheate into my barne.
 another parable put he foorth vnto them saying.
 the kyngdome of heauen is like to a grayne of mustard seede which a man toke sowed in his fielde.
 which in dede is the least of all seedes.
 but when it is growen it is the greatest among hearbes.
 and is a tree so that the byrdes of the ayre come make their nestes in the braunches therof.
 another parable spake he vnto them.
 the kyngdome of heauen is lyke vnto leuen which a woman taketh hydeth in three peckes of meale tyll all be leuened.
 all these thynges spake iesus vnto the people in parables.
 and without a parable spake he not vnto them.
 that it myght be fulfylled which was spoken by the prophete that sayth.
 i wyll open my mouth in parables i wyll speake foorth thynges which haue ben kept secrete from the foundation of the worlde.
 then iesus sent the people away went into the house.
 and his disciples came vnto hym saying.
 declare vnto vs the parable of the tares of the fielde.
 he aunswered and sayde vnto them.
 he that soweth the good seede is the sonne of man.
 the fielde is the worlde.
 the good seede they are the children of the kingdom.
 the tares are the chyldren of the wicked.
 the enemie that foweth them is the deuyll.
 the haruest is the ende of the worlde.
 the reapers be the angels.
 euen as the tares therfore are gathered and brent in the fyre.
 so shall it be in the ende of this worlde.
 the sonne of man shall sende foorth his angels and they shall gather out of his kyngdome all thynges that offende and them which do iniquitie.
 and shall cast them into a furnesse of fyre.
 there shalbe waylyng and gnasshyng of teeth.
 then shall the ryghteous shine as the sunne in the kingdome of their father.
 who hath eares to heare let hym heare.
 agayne the kyngdome of heauen is lyke vnto treasure hyd in the fielde.
 the which a man hath founde and hyd and for ioy therof goeth and selleth all that he hath and byeth the fielde.
 agayne the kyngdome of heauen is lyke vnto a marchaunt man seekyng goodly pearles.
 which when he founde one precious pearle went and solde all that he had and bought it.
 agayne the kyngdome of heauen is lyke vnto a net that was cast into the sea and gathered of all kynde.
 which when it was full men drewe to lande and sat downe and gathered the good into vessels but cast the bad away.
 so shall it be at the ende of the world.
 the angels shall come foorth and seuer the bad from among the iuste.
 and shall cast them into a furnesse of fyre.
 there shalbe waylyng and gnasshyng of teeth.
 iesus sayth vnto them.
 haue ye vnderstande all these thynges.
 they say vnto hym.
 yea lorde.
 then sayde he vnto them.
 therfore euery scribe which is taught vnto the kyngdome of heauen is lyke vnto a man that is an householder whiche bryngeth foorth out of his treasure thynges newe and olde.
 and it came to passe that when iesus had finished these parables he departed thence.
 and when he came into his owne countrey he taught them in their synagogues in so much that they were astonyed and sayde.
 whence commeth this wysdome and powers vnto hym.
 is not this the carpenters sonne.
 is not his mother called marie.
 and his brethren iames and ioses and simon and iudas.
 and are not all his sisters with vs.
 whence hath he then all these thynges.
 and they were offended in hym.
 iesus sayde vnto them.
 a prophete is not without honour saue in his owne countrey and in his owne house.
 and he did not many mightie workes there because of their vnbeliefe.
 at that tyme herode the tetrarch hearde of the fame of iesu.
 and sayde vnto his seruauntes.
 this is iohn the baptist he is risen from the dead and therfore great workes do shewe foorth them selues in hym.
 for herode had taken iohn and bounde hym and put hym in prison for herodias sake his brother philips wyfe.
 for iohn sayde vnto hym.
 it is not lawfull for thee to haue her.
 and when he woulde haue put hym to death he feared the people.
 because they counted hym as a prophete.
 but when herodes birth day was kept the daughter of herodias daunsed before them and pleased herode.
 wherefore he promised with an othe that he woulde geue her whatsoeuer she woulde aske.
 and she beyng instruct of her mother before sayde.
 geue me here iohn baptistes head in a platter.
 and the kyng was sory.
 neuerthelesse for the othes sake and them which sate also at the table he commaunded it to be geuen her.
 and sent and beheaded iohn in the pryson.
 and his head was brought in a platter and geuen to the damsell.
 and she brought it to her mother.
 and his disciples came and toke vp his body and buryed it.
 and went and tolde iesus.
 when iesus hearde of it he departed thence in a shyp vnto a desert place out of the way.
 and when the people had hearde therof they folowed hym on foote out of the cities.
 and iesus went foorth and sawe much people.
 and was moued with mercye towarde them and he healed their sicke.
 and when the euen drewe on his disciples came to hym saying.
 this is a desert place and the hour is nowe past let the people depart that they may go into the townes and bye them vittels.
 but iesus sayde vnto them.
 they haue no nede to go away geue ye them to eate.
 they saye vnto hym.
 we haue here but fyue loaues and two fisshes.
 he sayde.
 bryng them hyther to me.
 and he commaunded the people to sit downe on the grasse and he toke the fyue loaues and the two fisshes and lift vp his eyes towarde heauen blessed.
 and when he had broken them he gaue the loaues to his disciples and his disciples to the people.
 and they dyd all eate and were suffised.
 and they gathered vp of the fragmentes that remayned twelue baskets full.
 and they that had eaten were about fyue thousande men besyde women and chyldren.
 and strayghtway iesus constrayned his disciples to get vp into a shippe and to go before hym vnto the other syde whyle he sent the people away.
 and when the people were sent away he went vp into a mountayne alone to pray.
 and when nyght was come he was there hym selfe alone.
 but the shippe was nowe in the middes of the sea was tost with waues.
 for it was a contrary wynde.
 and in the fourth watch of the nyght iesus went vnto them walkyng on the sea.
 and when the disciples sawe hym walking on the sea they were troubled saying it is a spirite.
 and they cryed out for feare.
 but strayght way iesus spake vnto them saying.
 be of good cheare it is i be not afrayde.
 peter aunswered hym and sayde.
 lorde yf it be thou byd me come vnto thee on the water.
 and he sayde.
 come.
 and when peter was come downe out of the shippe he walked on the water to go to iesus.
 but when he sawe a myghty wynde he was afrayde.
 and when he began to sincke he cryed saying lorde saue me.
 and immediatly iesus stretched foorth his hande and caught hym and sayde vnto hym.
 o thou of litle fayth wherefore diddest thou doubt.
 and when they were come into the shippe the wynde ceassed then they that were in the shippe came and worshypped hym saying.
 of a trueth thou art the sonne of god.
 and when they were gone ouer they came into the lande of gennezaret.
 and when the men of that place had knowledge of hym they sent out into all that countrey rounde about.
 and brought vnto hym all that were sicke.
 and besought hym that they myght touche the hemme of his garment only.
 and as many as touched it were made whole.
 then came to iesus scribes and pharisees which were come from hierusalem saying.
 why do thy disciples transgresse the traditions of the elders.
 for they washe not their handes when they eate bread.
 but he aunswered and sayde vnto them.
 why do ye also transgresse the commaundement of god by your tradition.
 for god commaunded saying.
 honour father and mother and he that curseth father or mother let hym dye the death.
 but ye say whosoeuer shall say to father or mother.
 by the gyft that is offered of me thou shalt be helped.
 and so shall he not honour his father or his mother.
 and thus haue ye made the commaundement of god of none effect by your tradition.
 hypocrites full well dyd esayas prophecie of you saying.
 this people draweth nye vnto me with their mouth and honoureth me with their lippes.
 howbeit their hearts are farre from me.
 but in vayne do they worshippe me teachyng doctrine preceptes of men.
 and he called the people to hym and sayde vnto them.
 heare vnderstande.
 that which goeth into the mouth defyleth not the man.
 but that which commeth out of the mouth defyleth the man.
 then came his disciples and sayde vnto hym.
 knowest thou not that the pharisees were offended after they hearde this saying.
 but he aunswered and sayde.
 euery plantyng which my heauenly father hath not planted shalbe rooted vp.
 let them alone they be the blynde leaders of the blynde.
 if the blynde leade the blynde both shall fall into the dytche.
 then aunswered peter and sayde vnto hym.
 declare vnto vs this parable.
 iesus sayde.
 are ye also without vnderstandyng.
 do not ye yet vnderstande that whatsoeuer entreth in at the mouth goeth into the belly and is cast out into the draught.
 but those thynges which proceade out of the mouth come foorth from the heart and they defyle the man.
 for out of the heart proceade euyll thoughtes murders adulteries whordomes theftes false witnesse blasphemyes.
 these are the thynges which defyle a man.
 but to eate with vnwasshen handes defyleth not a man.
 and iesus went thence and departed into the coastes of tyre and sidon.
 and beholde a woman of the chananites which came out of the same coastes cryed vnto hym saying.
 haue mercie on me o lorde thou sonne of dauid.
 my daughter is greeuously vexed with a deuyll.
 but he aunswered her not a worde.
 and his disciples came and besought hym saying.
 sende her away for she cryeth after vs.
 but he aunswered and sayde.
 i am not sent but vnto the lost sheepe of the house of israel.
 then came she and worshipped him saying.
 lorde helpe me.
 he aunswered and sayde.
 it is not meete to take the chyldrens bread and to cast it to litle dogges.
 she aunswered and sayde trueth lorde.
 and yet litle dogges eate of the crummes which fall from their maisters table.
 then iesus aunswered and sayde vnto her.
 o woman great is thy fayth be it vnto thee euen as thou wylt.
 and her daughter was made whole euen from that same tyme.
 and iesus went from thence and came nye vnto the sea of galilee and went vp into a mountayne and sate downe there.
 and great multitudes came vnto him hauyng with them those that were lame blynde dumbe maymed other many and cast them downe at iesus feete.
 and he healed them.
 in so much that the people wondred when they sawe the dumbe speake the maymed to be whole the lame to walke and the blynde to see.
 and they glorified the god of israel.
 then iesus called his disciples vnto hym and sayde.
 i haue compassion on the people because they continue with me nowe three dayes and haue nothing to eate.
 and i wyll not let them depart fastyng lest they faynt in the way.
 and his disciples say vnto hym.
 whence shoulde we get so much bread in the wyldernesse as to suffise so great a multitude.
 and iesus sayeth vnto them.
 howe many loaues haue ye.
 and they say seuen and a fewe litle fisshes.
 and he commaunded the people to sit downe on the grounde.
 and toke the seuen loaues and the fisshes.
 and after that he had geuen thankes he brake them and gaue to his disciples and the disciples gaue them to the people.
 and they dyd all eate and were suffised.
 and they toke vp of the broken meate that was left seuen baskets full.
 and yet they that did eate were foure thousande men besyde women and chyldren.
 and he sent away the people and toke shippe and came into the parties of magdala.
 the pharisees also with the saducees came and temptyng desired hym that he woulde shewe them a signe from heauen.
 he aunswered sayde vnto them.
 when it is euenyng ye say it wyll be fayre weather.
 for the sky is redde.
 and in the mornyng it wyll be foule weather to day.
 for the sky is lowryng redde.
 o ye hypocrites ye can discerne the outwarde appearaunce of the sky.
 but can ye not discerue the signes of the tymes.
 the froward and adulterous nation requireth a signe.
 and there shall no signe be geuen vnto it but the signe of the prophete ionas.
 and he left them and departed.
 and when his disciples were come to the other syde of the water they had forgotten to take bread with them.
 then iesus sayde vnto them.
 take heede and beware of the leuen of the pharisees and of the saducees.
 and they thought in them selues saying.
 for we haue taken no bread with vs.
 which when iesus vnderstoode he sayde vnto them.
 o ye of little fayth why thynke you within your selues because ye haue brought no bread.
 do ye not yet perceaue neither remember those fyue loaues when there were fyue thousande men and howe many baskets toke ye vp.
 neither the seuen loaues when there were foure thousande men and howe many baskets toke ye vp.
 howe is it that ye do not vnderstande that i spake it not vnto you concernyng bread warnyng you that ye shoulde beware of the leuen of the pharisees and of the saducees.
 then vnderstoode they howe that he bad not them beware of the leuen of bread.
 but of the doctrine of the pharisees and of the saducees.
 when iesus came into the coastes of cesarea philippi he asked his disciples saying.
 whom do men say that i the sonne of man am.
 they sayde.
 some say that thou art iohn baptist some helias some ieremias or one of the prophetes.
 he sayth vnto them.
 but whom say ye that i am.
 simon peter aunswered and sayde.
 thou art christe the sonne of the lyuyng god.
 and iesus aunswered and sayde vnto hym.
 happy art thou simon bar iona for flesh blood hath not opened that vnto thee but my father which is in heauen.
 and i say also vnto thee that thou art peter and vpon this rocke i wyll buylde my congregation.
 and the gates of hell shall not preuayle agaynst it.
 and i wyll geue vnto thee the keyes of the kingdome of heauen.
 and whatsoeuer thou byndest in earth shalbe bounde in heauen.
 and whatsoeuer thou loosest in earth shalbe loosed in heauen.
 then charged he his disciples that they shoulde tell no man that he was iesus christe.
 from that tyme foorth began iesus to shewe vnto his disciples howe that he must go vnto hierusalem and suffer many thynges of the elders and hye priestes scribes and must be kylled and be raysed agayne the thyrde day.
 and when peter had taken him aside he began to rebuke hym saying.
 lorde fauour thy selfe this shall not be vnto thee.
 but he turned hym about and sayde vnto peter.
 go after me satan thou art an offence vnto me.
 for thou sauerest not the thynges that be of god but those that be of men.
 then sayde iesus vnto his disciples.
 if any man wyll folowe me let hym forsake him selfe and take vp his crosse and folowe me.
 for who so wyll saue his lyfe shall lose it.
 agayne who so doth lose his lyfe for my sake shall fynde it.
 for what doth it profite a man yf he wynne all the whole worlde and lose his owne soule.
 or what shall a man geue for a raunsome of his soule.
 for the sonne of man shall come in the glory of his father with his angels.
 and then shall he rewarde euery man accordyng to his workes.
 veryly i say vnto you there be some standyng here which shall not taste of death tyll they see the sonne of man come in his kyngdome.
 and after sixe dayes iesus taketh peter iames and iohn his brother and bryngeth them vp into an hye mountayne out of the way and was transfigured before them and his face did shyne as the sunne and his clothes were as whyte as the lyght.
 and beholde there appeared vnto them moyses and elias talkyng with hym.
 then aunswered peter and sayde vnto iesus.
 lorde it is good for vs to be here.
 if thou wylt let vs make here three tabernacles.
 one for thee and one for moyses and one for elias.
 whyle he yet spake beholde a bryght cloude shadowed them.
 and beholde there came a voyce out of the cloude which sayde this is my beloued sonne in whom i am well pleased heare hym.
 and when the disciples hearde these thynges they fell on their face and were sore afrayde.
 and iesus came and touched them and sayde.
 aryse and be not afrayde.
 and when they had lyft vp their eyes they sawe no man saue iesus only.
 and when they came downe from the mountayne iesus charged them saying.
 shewe the vision to no man vntyll the sonne of man be rysen agayne from the dead.
 and his disciples asked hym saying.
 why then say the scribes that elias must first come.
 iesus aunswered sayde vnto them.
 elias truely shall first come and restore all thynges.
 but i say vnto you that elias is come alredy and they knewe hym not but haue done vnto hym whatsoeuer they lusted.
 lykewyse shall also the sonne of man suffer of them.
 then the disciples vnderstode that he spake vnto them of iohn baptist.
 and when they were come to the people there came to hym a certayne man knelyng downe to hym and saying.
 lorde haue mercy on my sonne for he is lunaticke and sore vexed.
 for oft tymes he falleth into the fyre and oft into the water.
 and i brought hym to thy disciples and they coulde not heale hym.
 iesus aunswered and sayde.
 o faythlesse and croked nation howe long shall i be with you.
 howe long shal i suffer you.
 bryng hym hyther to me.
 and iesus rebuked the deuyll and he departed out of hym.
 and the chylde was healed euen that same tyme.
 then came the disciples to iesus secretely and sayde.
 why coulde not we cast hym out.
 iesus sayde vnto them.
 because of your vnbeliefe.
 for veryly i say vnto you.
 if ye haue fayth as a grayne of mustarde seede ye shall say vnto this mountayne.
 remoue hence to yonder place and it shall remoue neither shall any thyng be vnpossible vnto you.
 howebeit this kynde goeth not out but by prayer and fastyng.
 whyle they were occupyed in galilee iesus sayde vnto them.
 it wyll come to passe that the sonne of man shalbe betrayed into the handes of men.
 and they shall kyll hym the thyrde day shall he ryse agayne.
 and they were exceadyng sory.
 and when they were come to capernaum they that receaued tribute money came to peter and sayde.
 doth not your maister pay tribute.
 he sayth.
 yes.
 and when he was come into the house iesus preuented hym saying.
 what thynkest thou simon.
 of whom do the kynges of the earth take tribute or toule.
 of the chyldren or of straungers.
 peter sayth vnto hym.
 of straungers.
 iesus sayth vnto hym.
 then are the chyldren free.
 notwithstandyng lest we shoulde offende them go thou to the sea and cast an angle and take the fisshe that first commeth vp.
 and when thou hast opened his mouth thou shalt fynde a peece of twenty pence.
 that take and geue it vnto them for me and thee.
 at the same time came the disciples vnto iesus saying.
 who is the greatest in the kyngdome of heauen.
 iesus called a litle chylde vnto hym and set hym in the myddest of them and sayde.
 veryly i say vnto you.
 except ye turne and become as litle chyldren ye shall not enter into the kyngdome of heauen.
 whosoeuer therfore shall humble hym selfe as this litle chylde the same is the greatest in the kingdome of heauen.
 and who so shall receaue such a litle chylde in my name receaueth me.
 but who so shall offende one of these litle ones which beleue in me it were better for hym that a myll stone were hanged about his necke that he were drowned in the deapth of the sea.
 wo vnto the worlde because of offences.
 it must nedes be that offences come.
 but wo to that man by whom the offence commeth.
 if then thy hande or thy foote offende thee cut them of and cast them from thee.
 it is better for thee to enter into lyfe halt or maymed rather then thou shouldest hauyng two handes or two feete be cast into euerlastyng fyre.
 and yf thyne eye offende thee plucke it out and cast it from thee.
 it is better for thee to enter into lyfe with one eye rather then hauyng two eyes to be cast into hell fyre.
 take heede that ye despise not one of these litle ones.
 for i say vnto you that in heauen their angels do alwayes beholde the face of my father which is in heauen.
 for the sonne of man is come to saue that which was lost.
 howe thynke ye.
 if a man haue an hundred sheepe and one of them be gone astray doth he not leaue ninetie nine and goeth into the mountaynes and seketh that which went astray.
 and yf it so be that he fynde it veryly i say vnto you he reioyceth more of that sheepe then of the ninetie and nine which went not astray.
 euen so it is not the wyll of your father in heauen that one of these litle ones shoulde peryshe.
 moreouer yf thy brother trespas agaynst thee go and tell hym his faulte betwene thee and hym alone.
 if he heare thee thou hast wonne thy brother.
 but yf he heare thee not then take yet with thee one or two.
 that in the mouth of two or three witnesses euery worde may be stablyshed.
 if he heare not them tell it vnto the churche.
 if he heare not the churche let hym be vnto thee as an heathen man and a publicane.
 veryly i say vnto you.
 whatsoeuer ye bynde on earth shalbe bounde in heauen.
 and whatsoeuer ye loose on earth shalbe loosed in heauen.
 agayne truely i say vnto you that if two of you agree in earth as touching any thyng that they shall aske it shalbe done for them of my father which is in heauen.
 for where two or three are gathered together in my name there am i in the myddes of them.
 then came peter to hym and sayde.
 lorde howe oft shall my brother sinne agaynst me and i forgeue hym.
 tyll seuen tymes.
 iesus sayth vnto hym i say not vnto thee vntyll seuen tymes.
 but vntyll seuentie tymes seuen.
 therfore is the kyngdome of heauen lykened vnto a certayne man that was a kyng which woulde take accomptes of his seruauntes.
 and when he had begunne to recken one was brought vnto hym which ought hym ten thousande talentes.
 but forasmuch as he had not to pay his lorde commaunded hym to be solde and his wyfe and chyldren and all that he had and payment to be made.
 the seruaunt fell downe besought hym saying.
 lorde haue pacience with me and i wyll pay thee all.
 then the lorde of that seruaunt moued with pitie loosed hym and forgaue hym the debt.
 but the same seruaunt went out and founde one of his felowes which ought hym an hundred pence.
 and he layde handes on hym and toke hym by the throte saying.
 pay me that thou owest.
 and his felowe fel downe at his feete and besought him saying.
 haue pacience with me and i wyll pay thee all.
 and he woulde not.
 but went and cast hym into prison tyll he shoulde pay the debt.
 so when his felowes sawe what was done they were very sory.
 came and tolde vnto their lorde all that was done.
 then his lorde called hym and sayd vnto him.
 o thou vngracious seruaunt i forgaue thee all that debt when thou desiredst me.
 shouldest not thou also haue had compassion on thy felowe euen as i had pitie on thee.
 and his lorde was wroth and delyuered hym to the tormentours tyll he shoulde pay all that was due vnto him.
 so lykewyse shall my heauenly father do also vnto you yf ye from your heartes forgeue not euery one his brother their trespasses.
 and it came to passe that when iesus had finished these sayinges he gat hym from galilee and came into the coastes of iurie beyonde iordane.
 and great multitudes folowed hym.
 and he healed them there.
 the pharisees also came vnto hym temptyng hym and saying vnto hym.
 is it lawfull for a man to put away his wyfe for euery cause.
 he aunswered and sayde vnto them.
 haue ye not read that he which created at the begynnyng made them male and female and sayde.
 for this cause shall a man leaue father and mother and shall be knit to his wyfe.
 and they twayne shall be one fleshe.
 wherfore they are no more twayne but one fleshe.
 let not man therefore put a sunder that which god hath coupled together.
 they say vnto hym.
 why did moyses then commaunde to geue a writyng of diuorcement and to put her away.
 he sayde vnto them.
 moyses because of the hardnes of your heartes suffred you to put away your wyues.
 but from the begynnyng it was not so.
 i say vnto you.
 whosoeuer putteth away his wyfe except it be for fornication and maryeth another committeth adulterie.
 and who so maryeth her which is diuorced doth commit adulterie.
 his disciples say vnto hym.
 if the matter be so betwene man and wyfe then is it not good to mary.
 he sayde vnto them.
 all men can not receaue this saying saue they to whom it is geuen.
 for there are some chaste which are so borne out of their mothers wombe.
 and there are some chaste which be made chaste of men.
 and there be chaste which haue made themselues chaste for the kyngdome of heauens sake.
 he that is able to receaue it let him receaue it.
 then were there brought vnto hym young chyldren that he shoulde put his handes on them and pray.
 and the disciples rebuked them.
 but iesus sayde vnto them.
 suffer the young chyldren and forbyd them not to come vnto me.
 for of such is the kyngdome of heauen.
 and when he had put his handes on them he departed thence.
 and beholde one came and sayde vnto hym.
 good maister what good thyng shall i do that i may haue eternall lyfe.
 he sayde vnto hym.
 why callest thou me good.
 there is none good but one and that is god.
 but yf thou wylt enter into lyfe kepe the commaundementes.
 he sayth vnto hym.
 which.
 iesus sayde.
 thou shalt do no murther thou shalt not commit adulterie thou shalt not steale thou shalt not beare false witnesse honour father and mother.
 and thou shalt loue thy neighbour as thy selfe.
 the young man sayth vnto hym.
 all these thynges haue i kept from my youth vp.
 what lacke i yet.
 iesus sayde vnto hym.
 yf thou wylt be perfect go sell that thou hast and geue to the poore thou shalt haue treasure in heauen.
 and come folowe me.
 but when the young man hearde that saying he went away sory.
 for he had great possessions.
 then iesus sayde vnto his disciples.
 veryly i say vnto you that a riche man shall hardly enter into the kyngdome of heauen.
 and agayne i say vnto you.
 it is easier for a camel to go through the eye of a nedle then for the riche to enter into the kyngdome of god.
 when the disciples hearde this they were exceadyngly amazed saying.
 who then can be saued.
 but iesus behelde them and sayde vnto them.
 with men this is vnpossible but with god all thynges are possible.
 then aunswered peter and sayde vnto hym.
 beholde we haue forsaken all and folowed thee what shall we haue therfore.
 iesus sayde vnto them.
 veryly i say vnto you that when the sonne of man shall syt in the throne of his maiestie ye that haue folowed me in the regeneration shall syt also vpon twelue seates and iudge the twelue tribes of israel.
 and euery one that forsaketh house or brethren or sisters or father or mother or wyfe or chyldren or landes for my names sake shall receaue an hundred folde and shall inherite euerlastyng lyfe.
 but many that are first shalbe last and the last shalbe first.
 for the kyngdome of heauen is lyke vnto a man that is an householder whiche went out earlye in the mornyng to hire labourers into his vineyarde.
 and he agreed with the labourers for a peny a day sent them into his vineyarde.
 and he went out about the thirde houre and sawe other standyng idle in the market place and saide vnto them.
 go ye also into the vineyard whatsoeuer is right i wyl geue you.
 and they went their way.
 agayne he went out about the sixth and nynth houre and dyd lykewyse.
 and about the eleuenth houre he went out and founde other standyng idle and saide vnto them.
 why stande ye here all the day idle.
 they saye vnto him.
 because no man hath hyred vs.
 he sayth vnto them.
 go ye also into the vineyarde and whatsoeuer is ryght that shall ye receaue.
 so when euen was come the lorde of the vineyard sayth vnto his steward.
 call the labourers and geue them their hire beginning at the last vntyll the first.
 and when they came that were hired about the eleuenth houre they receaued euery man a peny.
 but when the firste came also they supposed that they shoulde haue receaued more.
 and they lykewyse receaued euery man a peny.
 and when they had receaued it they murmured against the good man of the house saying.
 these laste haue wrought but one houre thou hast made them equall vnto vs whiche haue borne the burthen and heate of the day.
 but he aunswered to one of them said.
 frende i do thee no wrong.
 dyddest thou not agree with me for a peny.
 take that thyne is and go thy way.
 i wyll geue vnto this last euen as vnto thee.
 is it not lawfull for me to do that i wyll with myne owne.
 is thyne eye euyll because i am good.
 so the last shalbe the first the first shalbe last.
 for many be called but fewe be chosen.
 and iesus goyng vp to hierusalem toke the twelue disciples asyde in the way and sayde vnto them.
 beholde we go vp to hierusalem and the sonne of man shalbe betrayed vnto the chiefe priestes and vnto the scribes and they shall condempne hym to death.
 and shall deliuer him to the gentiles to be mocked and to be scourged and to be crucified.
 and the thirde day he shall ryse agayne.
 then came to hym the mother of zebedees chyldren with her sonnes worshyppyng hym and desiryng a certayne thyng of hym.
 and he sayth vnto her.
 what wylt thou.
 she saith vnto him.
 graunt that these my two sonnes may syt the one on thy ryght hande and the other on the left in thy kyngdome.
 but iesus aunswered and saide.
 ye wote not what ye aske.
 are ye able to drynke of the cuppe that i shall drynke of.
 and to be baptized with the baptisme that i am baptized with.
 they say vnto hym.
 we are able.
 he sayth vnto them.
 ye shall drynke in deede of my cuppe and be baptized with the baptisme that i am baptized with.
 but to syt on my ryght hande on my lefte is not myne to geue but to them for whom it is prepared for of my father.
 and when the ten hearde this they disdayned at the two brethren.
 but iesus called them vnto him and sayde.
 ye know that the princes of the gentiles haue dominion ouer them.
 and they that are great exercise aucthoritie vpon them.
 it shall not be so among you.
 but whosoeuer wyll be great among you let hym be your minister.
 and who so wyl be chiefe among you let hym be your seruaunt.
 euen as the sonne of man came not to be ministred vnto but to minister and to geue his lyfe a raunsome for many.
 and as they departed from hierico much people folowed hym.
 and behold two blind men syttyng by the waye syde when they hearde that iesus passed by they cryed saying.
 o lorde thou sonne of dauid haue mercie on vs.
 and the people rebuked them because they should holde their peace.
 but they cryed the more saying.
 haue mercy on vs o lorde thou sonne of dauid.
 and iesus stode styll called them and sayde.
 what wyll ye that i shall do vnto you.
 they saye vnto hym.
 lord that our eyes may be opened.
 so iesus had compassion on them and touched their eyes.
 and immediatly theyr eyes receaued syght.
 and they folowed hym.
 and when they drewe nye vnto hierusalem were come to bethphage vnto the mount of oliues then sent iesus two disciples saying vnto them.
 go into the towne that lyeth ouer agaynste you and anone ye shall fynde an asse tyed a colt with her.
 loose them and bryng them vnto me.
 and yf any man saye ought vnto you saye ye the lorde hath nede of them.
 and strayghtway he wyll let them go.
 all this was done that it myght be fulfylled which was spoken by the prophete saying.
 tell ye the daughter of sion.
 behold thy kyng commeth vnto thee meke and syttyng vpon an asse a colt the foale of the asse vsed to the yoke.
 the disciples went and did as iesus commaunded them and brought the asse and the colt and put on them their clothes and set hym theron.
 and many of the people spread their garmentes in the way.
 other cut downe braunches from the trees and strawed them in the way.
 moreouer the multitudes that went before that came after cryed saying.
 hosanna to the sonne of dauid.
 blessed is he that commeth in the name of the lorde hosanna in the hyest.
 and when he was come into hierusalem all the citie was moued saying.
 who is this.
 and the multitude saide.
 this is iesus that prophete of nazareth in galilee.
 and iesus went into the temple of god and cast out all them that sold and bought in the temple and ouerthrewe the tables of the money chaungers and the seates of them that solde doues and sayde vnto them it is written.
 my house shalbe called the house of prayer but ye haue made it a denne of thieues.
 and the blynde and the halt came to hym in the temple and he healed them.
 when the chiefe priestes and scribes sawe the wonders that he dyd and the chyldren crying in the temple and saying hosanna to the sonne of dauid they disdayned and sayde vnto hym.
 hearest thou what these saye.
 but iesus sayth vnto them yea haue ye neuer read.
 out of the mouth of babes suckelynges thou hast ordeyned prayse.
 and he left them and went out of the citie vnto bethanie.
 and he lodged there.
 in the mornyng as he returned into the citie he hungred.
 and when he sawe one fygge tree in the waye he came to it and founde nothyng theron but leaues only said vnto it.
 neuer fruite growe on thee henceforwarde.
 and anone the figge tree withered away.
 and when his disciples sawe it they marueyled saying.
 howe soone is the figge tree wythered away.
 iesus aunswered and saide vnto them.
 veryly i saye vnto you yf ye haue fayth and doubt not ye shall not onlye do this which is done to the figge tree.
 but also yf ye shall say vnto this mountayne be thou remoued and be thou cast into the sea it shalbe done.
 and all thynges whatsoeuer ye aske in prayer beleuyng ye shall receaue them.
 and when he was come into the temple the chiefe priestes the elders of the people came vnto hym teaching and saye.
 by what aucthoritie doest thou these thynges.
 and who gaue thee this power.
 iesus aunswered saide vnto them.
 i also wyll aske you one question which yf ye tell me i in likewise wyll tell you by what aucthoritie i do these thinges.
 the baptisme of iohn whence was it from heauen or of men.
 and they reasoned with them selues saying.
 if we shall say from heauen he wyll say vnto vs why dyd ye not then beleue hym.
 but yf we shall say of men then feare we the people.
 for all men holde iohn as a prophete.
 and they aunswered vnto iesus and sayde.
 we can not tell.
 and he saide vnto them.
 neither tell i you by what aucthoritie i do these thynges.
 but what thynke you.
 a man had two sonnes and came to the firste and saide.
 sonne go and worke to day in my vineyarde.
 he aunswered and saide i wyll not.
 but afterwarde he repented and went.
 then came he to the seconde sayde lykewyse.
 and he aunswered saide i wyll sir and went not.
 whether of them twayne did the wyl of the father.
 and they saide vnto him the first.
 iesus sayth vnto them.
 veryly i saye vnto you that publicanes harlottes go into the kingdome of god before you.
 for iohn came vnto you by the way of righteousnes ye beleued hym not.
 but publicanes harlottes beleued him.
 and ye when ye had sene it were not moued afterwarde with repentaunce that ye myght haue beleued hym.
 hearken another similitude.
 there was a certayne man an householder which made a vineyarde hedged it rounde about and made a wynepresse in it and buylt a towre and let it out to husbande men.
 and went into a strange countrey.
 and when the time of the fruite drewe neare he sent his seruauntes to the husbande men that they might receaue the fruites of it.
 and the husbande men caught his seruauntes and beatte one killed another and stoned another.
 agayne he sent other seruauntes mo then the first.
 and they dyd vnto them lykewyse.
 but laste of all he sent vnto them his owne sonne saying.
 they wyll stande in awe of my sonne.
 but when the husband men sawe the sonne they sayde among them selues.
 this is the heire come let vs kyll hym and let vs enioy his inheritaunce.
 and they caught hym and thrust him out of the vineyarde and slewe hym.
 when the lorde therfore of the vineyarde commeth what wyll he do vnto those husbande men.
 they sayde vnto hym.
 he wyll miserably destroy those wicked men wyll let out his vineyard vnto other husband men which shall delyuer him the fruite in due seasons.
 iesus sayth vnto them.
 did ye neuer reade in the scriptures.
 the stone which the buylders refused the same is become the head of the corner.
 this is the lordes doing and it is marueylous in our eyes.
 therefore saye i vnto you the kyngdome of god shalbe taken from you geuen to a nation bryngyng foorth the fruites therof.
 and whosoeuer falleth on this stone shalbe broken in peeces.
 but on whomsoeuer it falleth it shal all to grynd him.
 and when the chiefe priestes and pharisees had heard his parables they perceaued that he spake of them.
 and they went about to laye handes on hym but they feared the multitudes because they toke him as a prophet.
 and iesus aunswered and spake vnto them againe by parables and sayde.
 the kyngdome of heauen is lyke vnto a man that was a kyng which made a mariage for his sonne.
 and sent foorth his seruauntes to call them that were bidden to the wedding.
 and they woulde not come.
 agayne he sent foorth other seruauntes saying.
 tell them which are bidden beholde i haue prepared my dinner my oxen and my fatlynges are kylled and all thynges are redy.
 come vnto the mariage.
 but they made lyght of it and went their wayes one to his farme another to his marchaundize.
 and the remnaunt toke his seruauntes and entreated them spitefully and slewe them.
 but when the kyng hearde therof he was wroth and sent foorth his men of warre and destroyed those murtherers and brent vp their citie.
 then sayde he to his seruauntes the mariage in dede is prepared.
 but they which were bidden were not worthy.
 go ye therfore out into the hye wayes.
 and as many as ye fynde bid them to the mariage.
 and the seruauntes went out into the hye wayes and gathered together all as many as they coulde fynde both good and bad.
 and the weddyng was furnished with ghestes.
 then the kyng came in to see the ghestes.
 and when he spyed there a man which had not on a weddyng garment he sayde vnto hym.
 frende howe camest thou in hyther not hauyng a weddyng garment.
 and he was euen speachlesse.
 then sayde the kyng to the ministers.
 bynde hym hande and foote and cast hym into vtter darknesse.
 there shalbe wepyng and gnasshyng of teeth.
 for many be called but fewe are chosen.
 then went the pharisees and toke councell how they myght intangle hym in his talke.
 and they sent out vnto hym their disciples with the herodians seruauntes saying.
 maister we knowe that thou art true and teachest the way of god truely neither carest thou for any man.
 for thou doest not respect mens persons.
 tell vs therfore howe thynkest thou.
 is it lawfull that tribute be geuen vnto caesar or not.
 but iesus perceauyng their wickednesse sayde.
 why tempt ye me ye hypocrites.
 shewe me the tribute money.
 and they brought vnto hym a peny.
 and he sayde to them.
 whose is this image and superscription.
 they say vnto hym caesars.
 then sayde he vnto them.
 geue therfore vnto caesar the thynges which are caesars.
 and vnto god those thynges that are gods.
 when they had hearde these wordes they marueyled and left hym and went their way.
 the same day came to hym the saducees which say that there is no resurrection and asked hym saying.
 maister moyses sayde that if a man dye hauing no children his brother shoulde mary his wyfe and rayse vp seede vnto his brother.
 ther were with vs seuen brethren and the first maryed a wyfe and deceassed without issue and left his wyfe vnto his brother.
 likewyse the seconde and the thirde vnto the seuenth.
 last of all the woman dyed also.
 therfore in the resurrection whose wyfe shall she be of the seuen.
 for they all had her.
 iesus aunswered sayde vnto them.
 ye do erre not knowyng the scriptures nor the power of god.
 for in the resurrection they neither mary nor are geuen in maryage.
 but are as the angels of god in heauen.
 but as touchyng the resurrection of the dead.
 haue ye not read that which is spoken vnto you of god which sayth.
 i am the god of abraham and the god of isaac and the god of iacob.
 god is not the god of the dead but of the lyuyng.
 and when the multitudes hearde this they were astonyed at his doctrine.
 but when the pharisees had heard that he had put the saducees to silence they came together.
 and one of them which was a lawyer asked hym a question temptyng hym and saying.
 maister which is the great commaundent in the lawe.
 iesus sayde vnto hym.
 thou shalt loue the lorde thy god with all thy heart and with all thy soule and with all thy mynde.
 this is the first and great commaundement.
 and the seconde is lyke vnto this.
 thou shalt loue thy neyghbour as thy selfe.
 in these two commaundementes hang all the lawe and the prophetes.
 whyle the pharisees were gathered together iesus asked them saying.
 what thynke ye of christe.
 whose sonne is he.
 they sayde vnto hym the sonne of dauid.
 he sayde vnto them.
 howe then doth dauid in spirite call him lorde saying.
 the lorde sayd vnto my lorde.
 sit thou on my ryght hande tyll i make thyne enemyes thy footestoole.
 if dauid then call him lorde howe is he then his sonne.
 and no man was able to aunswere hym a worde.
 neither durst any man from that day foorth aske hym any mo questions.
 then spake iesus to the multitudes and to his disciples saying.
 the scribes and the pharisees sit in moyses seate.
 all therfore whatsoeuer they bid you obserue that obserue and do.
 but do not ye after their workes for they say and do not.
 yea they bynde together heauy burthens and greeuous to be borne and lay them on mens shoulders.
 but they them selues wyll not moue them with one of their fingers.
 all their workes they do for to be sene of men.
 they make broade their philacteries and enlarge the hemmes of their garmentes.
 and loue the vppermost seates at feastes and to syt in the chiefe place in councels and greetynges in the markettes and to be called of men rabbi.
 but be not ye called rabbi.
 for one is your maister euen christe and all ye are brethren.
 and call no man your father vpon the earth.
 for one is your father which is in heauen.
 neither be ye called maisters.
 for one is your maister euen christe.
 he that is greatest among you shalbe your seruaunt.
 but whosoeuer exalteth hym selfe shalbe brought lowe.
 and he that humbleth hym selfe shalbe exalted.
 wo vnto you scribes and pharisees hypocrites.
 for ye shut vp the kingdome of heauen before men.
 ye neither go in your selues neither suffer ye them that come to enter in.
 wo vnto you scribes and pharisees hypocrites.
 for ye deuoure widdowes houses and that vnder a pretence of long prayer.
 therfore ye shall receaue the greater dampnation.
 wo vnto you scribes and pharisees hypocrites.
 for ye compasse sea and lande to make one proselyte.
 when he is become one ye make hym two folde more the chylde of hell then ye your selues are.
 wo be vnto you ye blynde guides.
 for ye say whosoeuer doth sweare by the temple it is nothyng.
 but whosoeuer sweareth by the golde of the temple he is a detter.
 ye fooles and blynde.
 for whether is greater the golde or the temple that sanctifieth the golde.
 and whosoeuer sweareth by the aulter it is nothyng.
 but whosoeuer sweareth by the gyft that is vpon it he is a detter.
 ye fooles and blynde for whether is greater the gyft.
 or the aulter that sanctifieth the gyft.
 who so therfore sweareth by the aulter sweareth by it and by all thynges theron.
 and who so sweareth by the temple sweareth by it and by hym that dwelleth therin.
 and he that sweareth by heauen sweareth by the seate of god and by hym that sitteth theron.
 wo vnto you scribes and pharisees hypocrites for ye tythe mynt and annise and cummyn.
 and haue left the wayghtier matters of the lawe iudgement mercy and fayth.
 these ought ye to haue done and not to leaue the other vndone.
 ye blynde guides which strayne out a gnat and swalowe a camel.
 wo vnto you scribes and pharisees hypocrites.
 for ye make cleane the vtter syde of the cup of the platter.
 but within they are full of brybery excesse.
 thou blynde pharisee cleanse first that which is within the cup and platter that the outsyde of them may be cleane also.
 wo vnto you scribes and pharisees hypocrites.
 for ye are lyke vnto paynted sepulchres which in dede appeare beautifull outwarde but are within full of dead mens bones and of all fylthynes.
 euen so ye also outwardly appeare ryghteous vnto men.
 but within ye are full of hypocrisie and iniquitie.
 wo vnto you scribes and pharisees hypocrites.
 ye builde the tombes of the prophetes and garnishe the sepulchres of the ryghteous.
 and say yf we had ben in the dayes of our fathers we woulde not haue ben parteners with them in the blood of the prophetes.
 and so ye be witnesses vnto your selues that ye are the chyldren of them which kylled the prophetes.
 fulfyll ye lykewyse the measure of your fathers.
 ye serpentes ye generation of vipers howe wyll ye escape the dampnation of hell.
 wherfore beholde i sende vnto you prophetes and wyse men and scribes and some of them ye shall kyll and crucifie.
 and some of them shall ye scourge in your synagogues and persecute them from citie to citie.
 that vpon you may come all the ryghteous blood which hath ben shed vpon the earth from the blood of ryghteous abel vnto the blood of zacharias sonne of barachias whom ye slewe betwene the temple the aulter.
 veryly i say vnto you.
 all these thynges shal come vpon this generation.
 o hierusalem hierusalem thou that kyllest the prophetes and stonest them which are sent vnto thee.
 howe often woulde i haue gathered thy chyldren together euen as the henne gathereth her chickens vnder her wynges and ye woulde not.
 beholde your house is left vnto you desolate.
 for i say vnto you.
 ye shall not see me hencefoorth tyll that ye say blessed is he that commeth in the name of the lorde.
 and iesus went out and departed from the temple.
 and his disciples came to hym for to shewe hym the buildynges of the temple.
 iesus sayde vnto them.
 see ye not all these thynges.
 veryly i say vnto you there shall not be here left one stone vpon another that shall not be destroyed.
 and as he sat vpon a mount of oliues his disciples came vnto hym secretly saying.
 tell vs when shall these thynges be.
 what shall be the token of thy commyng of the ende of the worlde.
 and iesus aunswered and sayde vnto them.
 take heede that no man deceaue you.
 for many shall come in my name saying i am christe.
 and shall deceaue many.
 ye shal heare of warres rumours of warres.
 see that you be not troubled.
 for all these thynges must come to passe but the ende is not yet.
 nation shall ryse agaynst nation and realme agaynst realme.
 and there shalbe pestilence and famine and earthquakes in certayne places.
 all these are the begynnynges of sorowes.
 then shall they put you to trouble and shall kyll you and ye shalbe hated of all nations for my names sake.
 and then shall many be offended and shall betray one another and shall hate one another.
 and many false prophetes shall aryse and shall deceaue many.
 and because iniquitie shall abounde the loue of many shall waxe colde.
 but he that endureth to the ende the same shalbe saued.
 and this gospell of the kyngdome shalbe preached in all the worlde for a witnesse vnto all nations.
 and then shall the ende come.
 when ye therefore shall see the abhomination of desolation spoken of by daniel the prophete stande in the holy place who so readeth let hym vnderstande.
 then let them which be in iurie flee into the mountaynes.
 and let hym which is on the house toppe not come downe to fet any thyng out of his house.
 neither let hym which is in the fielde returne backe to fetche his clothes.
 wo shalbe in those dayes to them that are with chylde and to them that geue sucke.
 but pray ye that your flyght be not in the winter neither on the sabboth day.
 for then shalbe great tribulation such as was not since the begynnyng of the worlde to this tyme nor shalbe.
 yea and except those dayes shoulde be shortened there shoulde no fleshe be saued.
 but for the chosens sake those dayes shalbe shortened.
 then yf any man saye vnto you.
 lo here is christe or there.
 beleue it not.
 for there shall aryse false christes and false prophetes and shall shewe great signes and wonders.
 in so much that yf it were possible the very elect shoulde be deceaued.
 beholde i haue tolde you before.
 wherfore yf they say vnto you beholde he is in the desert.
 go not foorth.
 beholde he is in the secrete places.
 beleue it not.
 for as the lyghtnyng commeth out of the east and shineth into the west.
 so shall the commyng of the sonne of man be.
 for whersoeuer a dead carkas is euen there wyll the egles also be gathered together.
 immediatly after the tribulation of those dayes shal the sunne be darkened and the moone shall not geue her lyght and the starres shall fall from heauen and the powers of heauen shalbe shaken.
 and then shall appeare the signe of the sonne of man in heauen.
 and then shall all the kynredes of the earth mourne and they shall see the sonne of man comming in the cloudes of heauen with power and great glory.
 and he shall sende his angels with the great sounde of a trumpet and they shall gather together his chosen from the foure wyndes euen from one ende of heauen to the other.
 learne a parable of the fygge tree.
 when his braunche is yet tender and the leaues sprong ye knowe that sommer is nye.
 so lykewyse ye when ye see all these thynges be ye sure that it is neare euen at the doores.
 veryly i say vnto you.
 this generation shall not passe tyll all these thynges be fulfylled.
 heauen and earth shall passe away but my wordes shall not passe away.
 but of that day and houre knoweth no man no not the angels of heauen but my father only.
 but as the dayes of not were so shall also the commyng of the sonne of man be.
 for as in the dayes that went before the fludde they dyd eate and drynke marry and geue in maryage euen vntyll the day that noe entred into the arke.
 and knewe not tyll the fludde came and toke them all away.
 so shall also the commyng of the sonne of man be.
 then shall two be in the fielde the one receaued and the other refused.
 two women shalbe gryndyng at the myll the one receaued and the other refused.
 watch therfore for ye knowe not what houre your lorde doth come.
 of this yet be sure that yf the good man of the house knewe what watche the thiefe woulde come he woulde surely watche and not suffer his house to be broken vp.
 therfore be ye also redy.
 for in such an houre as ye thynke not the sonne of man commeth.
 who is a faythfull and wise seruaunt whom his lorde hath made ruler ouer his householde to geue them meate in season.
 blessed is that seruaunt whom his lorde when he commeth shall fynde so doyng.
 veryly i say vnto you that he shall make hym ruler ouer all his goodes.
 but and yf that euyll seruaunt say in his heart my lorde wyll be long a commyng.
 and so begyn to smyte his felowes yea and to eate and drynke with the dronken.
 the same seruauntes lorde shall come in a day when he loketh not for hym and in an houre that he is not ware of.
 and shall hewe hym in peeces geue hym his portion with hypocrites.
 there shalbe wepyng and gnasshyng of teeth.
 then shall the kyngdome of heauen be lykened vnto ten virgins which toke their lampes and went to meete the brydegrome.
 but fyue of them were foolyshe and fyue were wyse.
 they that were foolyshe toke their lampes but toke none oyle with them.
 but the wise toke oyle in their vessels with their lampes also.
 whyle the brydegrome taryed they all slumbred and slept.
 and euen at mydnyght there was a crye made.
 beholde the brydegrome commeth go out to meete hym.
 then all those virgins arose and prepared their lampes.
 so the foolyshe sayde vnto the wyse.
 geue vs of your oyle for our lampes are gone out.
 but the wyse aunswered saying.
 not so lest there be not mough for vs you.
 but go ye rather to them that sell and bye for your selues.
 and whyle they went to bye the brydegome came.
 and they that were redy went in with hym to the maryage and the gate was shut vp.
 afterwarde came also the other virgins saying.
 lorde lorde open to vs.
 but he aunswered and sayde.
 veryly i say vnto you i knowe you not.
 watch therfore for ye knowe neither the day nor yet the houre wherin the sonne of man shall come.
 lykewyse as a certayne man redy to take his iourney into a straunge countrey called his owne seruauntes and delyuered vnto them his goodes.
 and vnto one he gaue fyue talentes to another two and to another one.
 to euery man after his habilitie strayght way departed.
 then he that had receaued the fyue talentes went and occupyed with the same made them other fyue talentes.
 and lykewyse he that receaued two.
 he also gayned other two.
 but he that receaued that one went and digged in the earth and hyd his lordes money.
 after a long season the lorde of those seruauntes commeth and reckeneth with them.
 and so he that had receaued fyue talentes came and brought other fyue talentes saying.
 lorde thou delyueredst vnto me fyue talentes beholde i haue gayned with them fyue talentes mo.
 his lorde saide vnto him.
 well done thou good and faythfull seruaunt.
 thou hast ben faythfull ouer fewe thynges i wyll make thee ruler ouer manye thynges.
 enter thou into the ioy of thy lorde.
 he also that had receaued two talentes came and sayde.
 lorde thou delyueredst vnto me two talentes beholde i haue wonne two other talentes with them.
 his lorde saide vnto him.
 well done good and faithfull seruaunt.
 thou hast ben faythfull ouer fewe thinges i wyl make thee ruler ouer many thynges.
 enter thou into the ioy of thy lorde.
 then he which had receaued the one talent came and saide.
 lorde i knew thee that thou art an harde man reapyng where thou hast not sowen gatheryng where thou hast not strowed.
 and therfore was i afrayde went and hid thy talent in the earth.
 loe there thou hast that thyne is.
 his lorde aunswered and sayde vnto hym.
 thou euyll and slouthfull seruaunt thou knewest that i reape where i sowed not and gather where i haue not strowed thou oughtest therfore to haue delyuered my money to the exchaungers and then at my commyng shoulde i haue receaued myne owne with vauntage.
 take therfore the talent from hym and geue it vnto hym whiche hath ten talentes.
 for vnto euery one that hath shalbe geuen and he shall haue aboundaunce.
 but he that hath not from hym shalbe taken away euen that which he hath.
 and cast the vnprofitable seruaunt into vtter darknesse there shalbe wepyng and gnasshyng of teeth.
 when the sonne of man shall come in his glorie and all the holy angels with hym then shall he sitte vpon the throne of his glorie.
 and before hym shalbe gathered all nations.
 and he shall seperate them one from another as a shephearde deuideth his sheepe from the goates.
 and he shall set the sheepe on his right hande but the goates on the lefte.
 then shall the king say vnto them on his right hande.
 come ye blessed of my father inherite the kyngdome prepared for you from the foundation of the worlde.
 for i was an hungred and ye gaue me meate.
 i was thirstie and ye gaue me drynke.
 i was harbourlesse and ye toke me in.
 naked and ye clothed me.
 sicke and ye visited me.
 i was in pryson and ye came vnto me.
 then shall the ryghteous aunswere hym saying.
 lorde when sawe we thee an hungred fedde thee.
 or thirstie and gaue thee drynke.
 when sawe we thee harbourlesse and toke thee in.
 or naked and clothed thee.
 or when sawe we thee sicke or in prison and came vnto thee.
 and the kyng shall aunswere and say vnto them.
 veryly i say vnto you in as much as ye haue done it vnto one of the least of these my brethren ye haue done it vnto me.
 then shall he saye vnto them on the left hande.
 depart from me ye cursed into euerlasting fire which is prepared for the deuyll and his angels.
 for i was an hungred and ye gaue me no meate.
 i was thirstie and ye gaue me no drynke.
 i was harbourlesse and ye toke me not in.
 i was naked and ye clothed me not.
 i was sicke and in prison and ye visited me not.
 then shall they also aunswere hym saying.
 lorde when sawe we thee an hungred or a thirste or harbourlesse or naked or sicke or in pryson and did not minister vnto thee.
 then shall he aunswere them saying.
 veryly i say vnto you in as much as ye dyd it not to one of the least of these ye dyd it not to me.
 and these shall go into euerlastyng payne.
 the ryghteous into lyfe eternall.
 and it came to passe when iesus had finisshed all these sayinges he sayde vnto his disciples.
 ye knowe that after two dayes is the feast of passouer and the sonne of man is betrayed to be crucified.
 then assembled together the chiefe priestes and the scribes and the elders of the people vnto the palace of the hye prieste which was called caiaphas.
 and helde a councell that they might take iesus by subtiltie and kyll hym.
 but they sayde.
 not on the feast day lest there be an vprore among the people.
 when iesus was in bethanie in the house of simon the leper there came vnto him a woman hauing an alabaster boxe of precious oyntment and powred it on his head as he sate at the boorde.
 but when his disciples sawe it they had indignation saying.
 to what purpose is this waste.
 this oyntment might haue ben well solde and geuen to the poore.
 when iesus vnderstode that he saide vnto them.
 why trouble ye the woman.
 for she hath wrought a good worke vppon me.
 for ye haue the poore alwayes with you.
 but me shall ye not haue alwayes.
 for in that she hath cast this oyntment on my body she dyd it to bury me.
 veryly i say vnto you wheresoeuer this gospell shalbe preached in the world there shall also this that she hath done be tolde for a memoriall of her.
 then one of the twelue called iudas iscariot went vnto the chiefe priestes and sayde vnto them.
 what wyll ye geue me and i wyll delyuer hym vnto you.
 and they appoynted vnto hym thirtie peeces of syluer.
 and from that tyme foorth he sought oportunitie to betray hym.
 the first day of sweete bread the disciples came to iesus saying vnto him.
 where wylt thou that we prepare for thee to eate the passouer.
 and he saide.
 go into the citie to such a man and say vnto hym the maister sayth my tyme is at hand i wyll kepe the passouer at thy house with my disciples.
 and the disciples dyd as iesus had appoynted them.
 and they made redye the passouer.
 when the euen was come he sate downe with the twelue.
 and as they dyd eate he sayde.
 veryly i say vnto you that one of you shall betray me.
 and they were exceadyng sorowfull and began euery one of them to say vnhym lorde is it i.
 he aunswered and saide.
 he that dippeth his hand with me in the disshe the same shall betray me.
 the sonne of man truely goeth as it is written of him.
 but wo vnto that man by whom the sonne of man is betrayed.
 it had ben good for that man yf he had not ben borne.
 then iudas which betrayed hym aunswered and sayde.
 maister is it i.
 he sayde vnto hym thou hast sayde.
 when they were eatyng iesus toke bread and when he had geuen thankes he brake it and gaue it to the disciples and saide.
 take eate this is my body.
 and he toke the cuppe and after he had geuen thankes gaue it them saying.
 drinke ye all of this for this is my blood whiche is of the newe testament that is shedde for many for the remission of sinnes.
 but i say vnto you i wyll not drinke henceforth of this fruite of the vine tree vntyll that day when i shall drynke it newe with you in my fathers kyngdome.
 and when they hadde praysed god they went out vnto the mount of oliues.
 then sayth iesus vnto them.
 all ye shalbe offended because of me this night.
 for it is written.
 i wyll smyte the shephearde and the sheepe of the flocke shalbe scattered abrode.
 but after i am rysen againe i wyll go before you into galilee.
 peter aunswered and said vnto him.
 though all men be offended because of thee yet wyll i neuer be offended.
 iesus sayde vnto hym.
 veryly i say vnto thee that in this same nyght before the cocke crowe thou shalt denie me thryse.
 peter sayde vnto hym.
 though i shoulde dye with thee yet wyll i not denie thee.
 lykewyse also sayde all the disciples.
 then came iesus with them vnto a place which is called gethsemane and sayde vnto the disciples.
 sit ye here whyle i go and pray yonder.
 and he toke with him peter and the two sonnes of zebedee and began to waxe sorowfull and heauy.
 then sayde iesus vnto them.
 my soule is heauy euen vnto the death tary ye here and watche with me.
 and he went a litle farther and fell sat on his face and prayed saying.
 o my father if it be possible let this cuppe passe from me.
 neuerthelesse not as i wyll but as thou wylt.
 and he came vnto the disciples and founde them aslepe and sayth vnto peter.
 what coulde ye not watche with me one houre.
 watche and praye that ye enter not into temptation.
 the spirite in deede is wyllyng but the fleshe is weake.
 he went away once againe prayed saying.
 o my father if this cuppe may not passe away from me except i drinke it thy wyll be fulfylled.
 and he came and founde them a slepe agayne.
 for their eyes were heauy.
 and he left them and went agayne and prayed the thirde tyme saying the same wordes.
 then commeth he to his disciples and sayth vnto them.
 slepe hencefoorth take your rest beholde the houre is at hande and the sonne of man is betrayed into the handes of synners.
 ryse let vs be goyng.
 beholde he is at hande that doth betray me.
 whyle he yet spake loe iudas one of the twelue came and with hym a great multitude with swordes staues from the chiefe priestes and elders of the people.
 but he that betrayed him gaue them a token saying.
 whomsoeuer i kysse that same is he holde hym fast.
 and foorthwith he came to iesus and sayde hayle maister.
 and kyssed hym.
 and iesus sayde vnto hym.
 frende wherefore art thou come.
 then came they and layed handes on iesus and toke hym.
 and beholde one of them which were with iesus stretched out his hande and drewe his sworde and stroke a seruaunt of the hye priestes and smote of his eare.
 then saide iesus vnto hym.
 put vp thy sworde into his sheathe.
 for all they that take the sworde shall peryshe with the sworde.
 thynkest thou that i can not nowe pray to my father and he shall geue me more then twelue legions of angels.
 but howe then shall the scriptures be fulfylled.
 for thus must it be.
 in that same houre sayde iesus to the multitudes.
 ye be come out as it were vnto a thiefe with swordes and staues for to take me.
 i sate dayly with you teachyng in the temple and ye toke me not.
 but all this is done that the scriptures of the prophetes myght be fulfylled.
 then all the disciples forsoke him and fledde.
 and they toke iesus and ledde hym to caiaphas the hye prieste where the scribes and the elders were assembled.
 but peter folowed hym a farre of vnto the hye priestes palace and went in and sate with the seruauntes to see the ende.
 the chiefe priestes and elders and all the councell sought false witnesse agaynst iesus for to put hym to death but founde none.
 yea when many false witnesses came yet founde they none.
 at the last came two false witnesses and sayde.
 this felowe sayde.
 i am able to destroy the temple of god and to buylde it agayne in three dayes.
 and the chiefe priest arose and sayde vnto hym.
 aunswerest thou nothyng.
 why do these beare witnesse agaynst thee.
 but iesus helde his peace.
 and the chiefe priest aunswered and sayde vnto hym.
 i charge thee by the liuing god that thou tel vs whether thou be christ the sonne of god.
 iesus saith vnto him.
 thou hast said.
 neuerthelesse i saye vnto you hereafter shall ye see the sonne of man sitting on the ryght hande of power and commyng in the cloudes of the skye.
 then the hye priest rent his clothes saying.
 he hath spoken blasphemie what nede we of any mo witnesses.
 beholde now ye haue hearde his blasphemie what thynke ye.
 they aunswered and sayde.
 he is worthy to dye.
 then dyd they spyt in his face and buffeted hym with fistes.
 and other smote hym on his face with the paulme of their handes saying.
 prophecie vnto vs o christ who is he that smote thee.
 peter sate without in the palace.
 and a damsell came to hym saying thou also wast with iesus of galilee.
 but he denied before them all saying.
 i wote not what thou sayest.
 when he was gone out into the porch another wenche sawe hym and sayde vnto them that were there.
 this felowe was also with iesus of nazareth.
 and agayne he denyed with an oth.
 i do not knowe the man.
 and after a whyle came vnto hym they that stode by and sayde vnto peter.
 surely thou art euen one of them for thy speache bewrayeth thee.
 then began he to curse to sweare that he knewe not the man.
 and immediatly the cocke crewe.
 and peter remembred the worde of iesu which sayde vnto hym before the cocke crowe thou shalt denie me thrise.
 and he went out and wept bytterly.
 when the mornyng was come all the chiefe priestes and the elders of the people helde a councell agaynst iesus to put hym to death.
 and brought hym bounde and deliuered hym to pontius pilate the deputie.
 then iudas whiche had betrayed hym seyng that he was condempned repented hym selfe and brought agayne the thirtie peeces of syluer to the chiefe priestes and elders saying.
 i haue synned betraying the innocent blood.
 and they said.
 what is that to vs.
 see thou to that.
 and he cast downe the peeces of siluer in the temple and departed and went and hanged hym selfe.
 and the chiefe priestes toke the peeces of syluer and sayde.
 it is not lawfull for to put them into the treasurie because it is the price of blood.
 and they toke councell and bought with them a potters fielde to burye straungers in.
 wherfore that fielde is called the fielde of blood vntyll this day.
 then was fulfylled that which was spoken by ieremie the prophet saying.
 and they toke thirtie siluer peeces the price of hym that was valued whom they bought of the children of israel.
 and gaue them for the potters fielde as the lorde appoynted me.
 iesus stode before the deputie and the deputie asked him saying.
 art thou the king of the iewes.
 iesus saith vnto hym.
 thou sayest.
 and when he was accused of the chiefe priestes and elders he aunswered nothyng.
 then sayth pilate vnto him.
 hearest thou not how many witnesses they lay agaynst thee.
 and he aunswered hym to neuer a worde.
 insomuch that the deputie marueyled greatly.
 at that feast the deputie was wont to delyuer vnto the people a prysoner whom they woulde desire.
 he had then a notable prysoner called barabbas.
 therfore when they were gathered together pilate saide vnto them.
 whether wyll ye that i geue loose vnto you barabbas or iesus whiche is called christe.
 for he knewe that for enuy they had delyuered hym.
 when he was set downe to geue iudgment his wyfe sent vnto hym saying.
 haue thou nothing to do with that iuste man.
 for i haue suffred many thynges this day in a dreame because of him.
 but the chiefe priestes elders perswaded the people that they shoulde aske barabbas and destroy iesus.
 the deputie aunswered and saide vnto them.
 whether of the twayne wyll ye that i let loose vnto you.
 they saide barabbas.
 pilate sayde vnto them.
 what shall i do then with iesus whiche is called christe.
 they all sayde vnto hym.
 let hym be crucified.
 the deputie sayde.
 what euyll hath he done.
 but they cryed the more saying.
 let hym be crucified.
 when pilate sawe that he coulde preuayle nothyng but that more busynesse was made he toke water and washed his handes before the people saying.
 i am innocent of the blood of this iust person see ye to it.
 then aunswered all the people and sayde.
 his blood be on vs and on our chyldren.
 then let he barabbas loose vnto them and scourged iesus and deliuered hym to be crucified.
 then the souldiours of the deputie toke iesus in the common hall and gathered vnto hym all the bande of souldiours.
 and they stripped hym and put on hym a skarlet robe.
 and platted a crowne of thornes and put vppon his head and a reede in his right hande and bowed the knee before hym and mocked hym saying.
 hayle kyng of the iewes.
 and when they had spyt vpon hym they toke the reede and smote hym on the head.
 and after that they had mocked him they toke the robe of hym agayne and put his owne rayment on hym and led hym away to crucifie hym.
 and as they came out they founde a man of cyrene named simon.
 hym they compelled to beare his crosse.
 and they came vnto the place which is called golgotha that is to say a place of dead mens skulles.
 and gaue him vineger to drinke mingled with gall.
 and when he had tasted therof he woulde not drynke.
 when they had crucified hym they parted his garmentes did cast lottes that it myght be fulfylled whiche was spoken by the prophete.
 they departed my garmentes among them vpon my vesture dyd they cast lottes.
 and they sate watched him there.
 and set vp ouer his head the cause of his death written.
 this is iesus the king of the iewes.
 then were there two thieues crucified with hym.
 one on the ryght hande and another on the left.
 they that passed by reuyled hym waggyng their heades and saying.
 thou that destroyedst the temple buyldest it in three dayes saue thy selfe.
 if thou be the sonne of god come downe from the crosse.
 lykewyse also the hye priestes mockyng hym with the scribes and elders and pharisees sayde.
 he saued other hym selfe can he not saue.
 if he be the kyng of israel let him nowe come downe from the crosse and we wyll beleue hym.
 he trusted in god let hym delyuer hym nowe yf he wyll haue hym.
 for he sayde i am the sonne of god.
 the thieues also which were crucified with hym cast the same in his teeth.
 from the sixth houre was there darknesse ouer all the lande vnto the nynth houre.
 and about the nynth houre iesus cried with a loude voyce saying.
 eli eli lama sabachtani that is to say.
 my god my god why hast thou forsaken me.
 some of them that stode there when they hearde that saide.
 this man calleth for elias.
 and straightway one of them ranne and toke a sponge and when he had filled it full of vineger he put it on a reede and gaue hym to drynke.
 other sayde let be let vs see whether elias wyll come and saue hym.
 iesus when he had cryed agayne with a loude voyce yeelded vp the ghost.
 and beholde the vayle of the temple dyd rent into two partes from the toppe to the bottome and the earth did quake and the stones rent.
 and graues dyd open and many bodyes of saintes which slept arose.
 and went out of the graues after his resurrection and came into the holy citie and appeared vnto many.
 when the centurion and they that were with hym watchyng iesus sawe the earthquake and those thynges that were done they feared greatly saying.
 truely this was the sonne of god.
 and many women were there beholdyng hym a farre of whiche folowed iesus from galilee ministring vnto him.
 among which was marie magdalene and marie the mother of iames and ioses the mother of zebedees chyldren.
 when the euen was come there came a ryche man of aramathia named ioseph which also hym selfe was iesus disciple.
 he went to pilate and begged the body of iesus.
 then pilate commaunded the body to be delyuered.
 and when ioseph had taken the body he wrapped it in a cleane lynnen cloth.
 and layde it in his newe tombe which he had hewen out euen in the rocke and rolled a great stone to the dore of the sepulchre and departed.
 and there was marie magdalene the other marie syttyng ouer against the sepulchre.
 the next day that folowed the day of preparyng the hye priestes and pharisees came together vnto pilate saying.
 sir we remember that this deceauer sayde whyle he was yet aliue.
 after three dayes i wil arise agayne.
 commaunde therfore that the sepulchre be made sure vntyll the thirde day.
 lest his disciples come by nyght steale hym away and say vnto the people he is rysen from the dead.
 the last error shalbe worse then the first.
 pilate sayde vnto them.
 ye haue the watche go your way make it as sure as ye knowe.
 so they went and made the sepulchre sure with the watch and sealed the stone.
 in the later ende of the sabboth day whiche dawneth the first daye of the weke came marie magdalen and the other marie to see the sepulchre.
 and behold there was a great earthquake for the angell of the lorde descended from heauen and came roulled backe the stone from the doore and sate vpon it.
 his countenaunce was lyke lyghtnyng and his rayment white as snowe.
 and for feare of him the kepers were astonyed and became as dead men.
 the angell aunswered and sayde vnto the women feare ye not.
 for i knowe that ye seke iesus whiche was crucified.
 he is not here he is rysen as he saide.
 come se the place where that the lord was layde.
 and go quickly tell his disciples that he is rysen agayne from the dead.
 and beholde he goeth before you into galilee there shall ye see hym.
 loe i haue tolde you.
 and they departed quickly from the sepulchre with feare and great ioy and dyd runne to bryng his disciples worde.
 and as they went to tell his disciples beholde iesus met them saying.
 all hayle.
 and they came and helde him by the feete and worshypped hym.
 then sayde iesus vnto them.
 be not afrayde.
 go tell my brethren that they go into galilee there shal they see me.
 when they were gone beholde some of the watche came into the citie and shewed vnto the hye priestes all the thynges that were done.
 and they gathered them together with the elders and toke councell and gaue large money vnto the souldiers saying.
 saye ye that his disciples came by nyght stole hym away while ye slept.
 and yf this come to the deputies eares we wyll perswade hym and saue you harmelesse.
 so they toke the money dyd as they were taught.
 and this saying is noysed among the iewes vntyl this day.
 then the eleuen disciples went awaye into galilee into a mountayne where iesus had appoynted them.
 and when they sawe hym they worshypped hym.
 but some doubted.
 and iesus came and spake vnto them saying.
 all power is geuen vnto me in heauen and in earth.
 go ye therfore teache all nations baptizing them in the name of the father and of the sonne and of the holye ghost.
 teachyng them to obserue all thynges whatsoeuer i haue commaunded you.
 and loe i am with you alway euen vnto the ende of the worlde.
 