in the beginnyng god created the heauen the earth and the earth was without forme voyde darkenes was vpon the depe the spirit of god moued vpon the waters.
 then god said let there be light.
 there was light.
 and god sawe the light that it was good and god separated the light from the darkenes.
 and god called the light daye and the darkenes he called night.
 so the euening and the morning were the first day.
 againe god said let there be a firmament in the middes of the waters.
 and let it separate the waters from the waters.
 then god made the firmament and parted the waters which were vnder the firmament from the waters which were aboue the firmament and it was so.
 and god called the firmament heauen.
 so the euening and the morning were the seconde day.
 god said againe let the waters vnder the heauen be gathered into one place and let the drye land appeare and it was so.
 and god called the drye land earth and he called the gathering together of the waters seas.
 and god sawe that it was good.
 then god said let the earth budde forthe the budde of the herbe that sedeth sede the frutefultre which beareth frute according to his kinde which maie haue hie sede in itself vpon the earth and it was so.
 and the earth broght forthe the budde of the herbe that sedeth sede according to his kinde also the tre that yeldeth frute which hathe his sede in it selfe according to his kinde.
 and god sawe that it was good.
 so the euening and the morning were the third daie.
 and god said let there be lightes in the firmament of the heauen to separate the daie from the night and let them be for signes and for seasons and for daies and yeres.
 and let them be for lightes in the firmament of the heauen to giue light vpon the earth and it was so.
 god then made two great lightes.
 the greater light to rule the daie and the lesse light to rul the night the made also the starres.
 and god set them in the firmament of the heauen to shine vpon the earth and to rule in the daie and in the night to separate the light from the darkenes.
 and god sawe that it was good.
 so the euening and the morning were the fourth daie.
 afterwarde god said let the waters bring forthe in abundance euerie creping thing that hathe life.
 and let the foule flie vpon the earth in the open firmament of the heauen.
 then god created the great whales euerie thing liuing and mouing.
 which the waters broght forthe in abundance according to their kinde euerie fethered foule according to his kinde.
 and god sawe that it was good.
 then god blessed them saying bring forthe frute and multiplie and fil the waters in the seas and let the foule multiplie in the earth.
 so the euening and the morning were the fifte day.
 moreouer god said let the earth bring forthe the liuing thing according to his kinde cattel and that which crepeth and the beast of the earth according to his kinde it was so.
 and god made the beast of the earth according to his kinde and the cattel according to his kinde and euerie creping thing of the earth according to his kinde.
 and god sawe that it was good.
 furthermore god said let vs make man in our image according to our lickenes and let them rule ouer the fish of the sea and ouer the foule of the heauen and ouer the beastes and ouer all the earth and ouer euerie thing that crepeth and moueth on the earth.
 thus god created the man in his image.
 in the image of god created he him.
 he created them male and female.
 and god blessed them and god said to them bring forthe frute and multiplie and fil the earth and subdue it and rule ouer the fish of the sea and ouer the soule of the heauen and ouer euerie beast that moueth vpon the earth.
 and god said beholde i haue giuen vnto you euerie herbe bearing sede which is vpon all the earth and euerie tre wherein is the frute of a tre bearing sede.
 that shalbe to you for meat.
 like wise to euerie beast of the earth and to euerie foule of the heauen and to euerie thing that moueth vpon the earth which hathe life in it selfe euerie grene herbe shalbe for meat and it was so.
 and god sawe all that he had made and lo it was very good.
 so the euening and the morning were the sixt day.
 thus the heauens and the earth were finished and all the hoste of them for in the seuenth day god ended his worke which he had made and the seuenth daye he rested from all his worke which he had made.
 so god blessed he seuenth day and sanctified it because that in it he had rested from all his worke which god had created and made.
 these are the generacions of the heauens and of the earth.
 when thei were created in the day that the lord god made the earth and the heauens and euerie plant of the field before it was in the earth and euerie herbe of the field before it grewe.
 for the lord god had not caused it to raine vpon the earth nether was there a man to til the grounde but a myst went vp from the earth watred all the earth.
 the lord god also made the man of the dust of the grounde and breatched in his face breath of life and the man was a liuing soule.
 and the lord god planted a garden eastwarde in eden and there he put the man whome he had made.
 for out of the grounde made the lord god to growe euerie tre pleasant to the sight and good for meat.
 the tre of life also in the middes of the garden and the tre of knowledge of good and of euil.
 and out of eden went a riuer to water the garden and from thence it was deuided and became into foure heades.
 the name of one is pishon.
 the same compasseth the whole land of hauilah where is golde.
 and the golde of that land is good.
 there is also bdelium and the onix stone.
 and the name of the seconde riuer is gihon.
 the same compasseth the whole land of cush.
 the name also of the the third riuer is hid dek el.
 this goeth towarde the eastside of asshur.
 and the fourth riuer is perath then the lord god toke the man and put him into the garden of eden that he might dresse it and kepe it.
 and the lord god commanded the man saying thou shalt eat frely of euerie tre of the garden but as touching the tre of knowledge of good and euil thou shalt not eat of it.
 for whensoeuer thou eatest thereof thou shalt dye the death.
 also the lord god said it is not good that the man shuld be him selfe alone.
 i wil make him an helpe mete for him.
 so the lord god formed of the earth euerie beast of the field and euerie foule of the heauen and broght them vnto the man to se how he wolde call them.
 for howsoeuer the man named the liuing creature so was the name thereof.
 the man therefore gaue names vnto all cattel and to the foule of the heauen and to euerie beast of the field.
 but for adam founde he not an helpe mete for him.
 therefore the lord god caused an heauie slepe to fall vpon the man.
 and whiles he slept he toke one of his rybbes and closed vp the flesh in steade thereof.
 and the rybbe which the lord god had taken from the man made he a woman and broght her to the man.
 then the man said this now is bone of my bones and flesh of my flesh.
 she shalbe called woman because she was taken out of man.
 therefore shal man leaue his father and his mother and shal cleaue to his wife and they shalbe one flesh.
 and they were bothe naked the man and his wife and were not ashamed now the serpent was more subtil then anie beast of the field whiche the lord god had made.
 and he said to the woman yea hathe god in dede said ye shal not eat of euerie tre of the garden.
 and the woman said vnto the serpent we eat of the frute of the trees of the garden but of the frute of the tre which is in the middes of the garden god hathe said ye shal not eat of it nether shal ye touche it lest ye dye.
 then the serpent said to the woman ye shal not dye at all.
 but god doeth knowe that when ye shal eat thereof your eyes shalbe opened and ye shalbe as gods knowing good and euil so the woman seing that the tre was good for meat and that it was pleasant to the eyes and a treto be desired to get knowledge toke of the thereof and did eat and gaue also to her housband with her and he did eat.
 then the eyes of them bothe were opened and they knewe that they were naked and they sewed figtre leaues together and made them selues breeches.
 afterwarde they heard the voyce of the lord god walking in the garden in the coole of the day and the man and his wife hid them selues from the presence of the lord god among the trees of the garden.
 but the lord god called to the man and said vnto him where art thou.
 who said i heard thy voyce in the garden and was afraied.
 because i was naked therefore i hid my self and he said who tolde thee that thou wast naked.
 hast thou eaten of the tre whereof i commanded thee that thou shuldest not eat in no case.
 then the man said the woman which thou gauest to be with me she gaue me of the tre and i did eat.
 and the lord god said to the woman why hast thou done this.
 and the woman said the serpent beguyled me and i did eat.
 then the lord god said to the serpent because hast done this thou art cursed aboue all cattel and aboue euerie beast of the field.
 vpon thy belly shalt thou go and n dust shalt thou eat all the dayes of thy life.
 i wil also o put enimitie betwene thee and the woman and betwene thy sede and her sede.
 he shal breake thine phead and thou shalt q bruise his heele.
 vnto the woman he said i wil greately increase thy sorowes and thy conceptions.
 in sorowe shalt thou bring forthe children thy desire shal be subiect to thine housband and he shal rule ouer thee.
 also to adam he said because thou hast obeied the voyce of thy wife and hast eaten of the tre whereof i commanded thee saying thou shalt not eat of it cursed is the earth for thy sake in sorowe shalt thou eat of it all the dayes of thy life.
 thornes also thy shal it bring forthe to thee and thou shalt eat the herbe of the field.
 in the sweat of thy face thou eat bread til thou returne to the earth.
 for out of it thou taken because thou art dust to dust shalt thou returne.
 and the man called his wiues name because she was the mother of all liuing.
 vnto adam also and to his wife did the lord god make coates of skinnes clothed them.
 and the lord god said beholde the man is become as one of vs to knowe good euil.
 and now lest he put forthe his hand and take also of the tre of life and eat and liue for euer.
 therefore the lord god sent him forthe from the garden of eden to til the earth whence he was taken.
 thus he cast out man and at the eastside of the garden of eden he set the cherubims and the blade of a sworde shaken to kepe the waye of the tre of life.
 afterwarde the man knewe heuah his wife which conceiued and bare kain said i haue obteined a man by the lord and againe she broght forthe his brother habel and habel was a keper of shepe and kain was a tiller of the grounde.
 and in processe of time it came to passe that kain broght an oblation vnto the lord of the frute of the grounde.
 and habel also him selfe broght of the first frutes of his shepe and of the fat of them and the lord had respect vnto habel to his offring.
 but vnto and to his offring he had no regarde wherefore kain was exceding wroth and his countenance fel downe.
 then the lord said vnto kain why art thou wroth.
 and why is thy countenance cast downe.
 if thou do wel shalt thou not be accepted and if thou doest not wel sinne lieth at the dore.
 also vnto thee his desire shalbe subiect and thou shalt rule ouer him.
 then kain spake to his brother.
 and when they were in the field kain rose vp against habel his brother and slewe him.
 then the lord said vnto kain where is habel thy brother.
 who answered i can not tel am i my brothers keper.
 againe he said what hast thou done.
 the voyce of thy brothers blood cryeth vnto me from the grounde.
 now therefore thou art cursed from the earth which hathe opened her mouth to receiue thy brothers blood from thine hand when thou shalt til the grounde it shal not henceforthe yelde vnto thee her strength.
 a vagabonde and a renne gate shalt thou be in the earth.
 then kain said to the lord my punishement is greater then i can beare.
 beholde thou hast cast me out this day fro the earth and from thy face shal i be hid and shalbe a vagabonde and a gate in the earth whosoeuer findeth me shal slaye me.
 then the lord said vnto him douteles slayeth kain he shalbe punished seuen folde.
 and the lord set a marke vpon kain lest anie man finding him shulde kil him.
 then kain went out from the presence of the lord and dwelt in the land of nod towarde the eastside of eden.
 kain also knewe his wife which conceiued and bare henoch.
 and he buylt a citie and called the name of the citie by the name of his sonne henoch and to hench was borne irad and irad begate mehuiael and mehuiael begate methushael and methushal begate lamech.
 and lamech toke to him two wiues.
 the name of the one was adah and the name of the other zillh.
 and adah bare iabal who was the father of suche as dwel in the tentes and of suche as haue cattel.
 and his brothers name was iubal who was the father of all that playe on the harpe and organes and zillh also bare tubalkain who wroght cunningly euerie crafte of and of yron.
 and the sister of tubalkain was naamah.
 then lamech said vnto his wiues adah and zillah heare my voyce ye wiues of lamech.
 vnto my speche.
 for i wold a man in my wounde and a yong man in mine hurt.
 if kin shalbe auenged seuen folde truely lamech seuentie times seuen folde.
 and adam knewe his wife againe and she bare a sonne and she called his name sheth.
 for god said she hathe appointed me another sede for habel because kin slewe him.
 and to the same sheth also there was borne a sonne and he called his name enosh then began men to call vpon the name of the lord.
 this is the boke of the generacions of adam.
 in the day that god created adam in the lickenes of god made he him male and female created he the and blessed them and called their name adam in the day that they were created.
 now adam liued an hundreth and thirtie yeres and begate a childe in his owne lickenes after his image and called his name sheth.
 and the dayes of adam after he had begotten sheth were eight hundreth yeres and he begate sonnes and daughters.
 so all the dayes that adam liued were nine hundreth and thirtie yeres.
 and he dyed.
 and sheth liued an hundreth and fyue yeres and begate enosh.
 and sheth liued after he begate enosh eight hundreth and seuen yeres and begate sonnes and daughters.
 so all the dayes of sheth were nine hundreth and twelue yeres.
 and he dyed.
 also enosh liued ninety yeres begate kenan.
 and enosh liued after he begate kenan eight hundreth and fiftene yeres and begate sonnes and daughters.
 so all the daies of enosh were nine hundreth and fiue yeres.
 and he dyed.
 like wise kenan liued seuentie yeres begate mahala ieel.
 and kenan liued after he begate mahalaleel eight hundreth and fourty yeres and begate sonnes and daughters.
 so all the dayes of kenan were nine hundreth and ten yeres.
 and he dyed.
 mahalaleel also liued sixty fiue yeres and begate iered.
 also mahalaleel liued after he begate iered eight hundreth and thirty yeres and begate sonnes and daughters.
 so all the dayes of mahalaleel were eight hundreth ninety and fiue yeres.
 and he dyed.
 and iered liued an hundreth sixty and two yeres and begate henoch.
 then iered liued after he begate henoch eight hundreth yeres and begate sonnes and daughters.
 so all the dayes of iered were nine hundreth sixty and two yeres.
 he dyed.
 also henoch liued sixty and fiue yeres and begate methushelah.
 and henoch walked with god after he begate methushelah thre hundreth hundreth yeres and begate sonnes and daughters.
 so all the daies of henoch were thre hundreth sixty and fiue yeres.
 and henoch walked with god.
 and he was no more sene.
 for god token him away.
 methushelah also liued an hundreth eighty and seuen yeres and begate lamech.
 and methushelah liued after he begate lamech seuen hundreth eighty and two yeres and begate sonnes and daughters.
 so all the dayes of methushelah were nine hundreth sixty and nine yeres.
 and he dyed.
 then lamech liued an hundreth eighty and two yeres and begate a sonne.
 and called his name noah saying this same shal comforte vs concerning our worke and sorowe of our hands as touching the earth which the lord hathe cursed.
 and lamech liued after he begate noah fiue hundreth ninety and fiue yeres and begate sonnes and daughters.
 so all the dayes of lamech were seuen hundreth seuenty and seuen yeres.
 and he dyed.
 and noah was fiue hundreth yere olde.
 and noah begate shem ham and iapheth so when men began to be multiplied vpon the earth and there were daughters borne vnto them.
 then the sonnes of god the daughters of men that they were faire and they toke them wiues of all that they liked.
 therefore the lord said my spirit shal not alway striue with man because he is bu flesh his dayes shal be an hundreth and twentie yeres.
 there were gyantes in the earth in those dayes.
 yea and after that the sonnes of god came vnto the daughters of men and they had borne them children these were mightie men which in olde time were men of renoume.
 when the lord sawe that the wickednes of man was great in the earth all the imaginacions of the thoghts of his heart were onely euil continually.
 then it repented the lord that he had made man in the earth and he was sorie in his heart.
 therefore the lord said i wil destroye from the earth the man whome i haue created from man to beast to creping thing and to the foule of the heauen.
 for i repent that i haue made them.
 but noah founde grace in the eyes of the lord.
 these are the generacions of noah.
 noah was a iuste and vpright man in his time and walked with god.
 and noah begate thre sonnes shem ham and iapheth.
 the earth also was corrupt before god.
 for the earth was filled with crueltie.
 then god loked vpon the earth and beholde it was corrupt.
 for all flesh had corrupt his way vpon the earth.
 and god said vnto noah an end of all flesh is come before me.
 for the earth is filled with crueltie through the.
 and beholde i wil destroye them with the earth.
 make thee an arke of pine trees.
 thou shalt make cabine in the arke and shalt pytch it within and without with pytch.
 and thus shalt thou make it.
 the length of the arke shal be thre hundreth cubites the breadth of it fiftie cubites and the height of it thirtie cubites.
 a windowe shalt thou marke in the arke and in cubite shalt thou finish it aboue and the dore of the arke shalt thou set in the side thereof.
 thou shalt make it with the lowe seconde and third roume.
 and i beholde i wil bring a flood of waters vpon the earth to destroye all flesh wherein is the breath of life vnder the heauen.
 al that is in the earth shall perish.
 but with thee wil establish my couenant and thou shalt go into the arke thou and thy sonnes and thy wife and thy sonnes wiues with thee and of euerie liuing thing of all flesh two of euerie sorte shalt thou cause to come into the arke to kepe them aliue with thee.
 they shalbe male and female.
 of the foules after their kinde and of the cattel after their kinde of euerie crepyng thing of the earth after his kinde two of euerie sorte shall come vnto thee that thou maiest kepe them aliue.
 and take thou with thee of all meat that is eaten.
 and thou shalt gather it to thee that it may be meat for thee and for them.
 noah therefore did according vnto all that god commanded him.
 euen so did he.
 and the lord said vnto nah entre thou and all thine house into the arke.
 for thee haue i sene righteous before me in this age.
 of euerie cleane beast thou shalt take to thee by seuens the male and his female.
 but of vncleane beastes by couple the male and his female.
 of the foules also of the heauen by seuens male and female to kepe sede aliue vpon the whole earth.
 for seuen dayes hence i will cause it raine vpon the earth fourthy dayes and fourty nights and al the substance that i haue made will i destroye from of the earth.
 nah therefore did accordyng vnto all that the lord commanded him.
 and nah was six yeres olde when the flood of waters was vpon the earth.
 so nah entred and his sonnes his wife and his sonnes wiues with him into the arke because of the waters of the flood.
 of the cleane beastes and of the vncleane beastes and of the foules and of all that crepeth vpon the earth.
 there came two and two vnto noah into the arke male and female as god had commanded nah.
 and so after seuen dayes the waters of the flood were vpon the earth.
 in the six hundreth yere of noahs life in the seconde moneth the seuententh day of the moneth in the same day were all the fountaines of the great depe broken vp and the windowes of heauen were opened.
 and the raine was vppon the earth fourty dayes and fourty nights.
 in the selfe same day entred nah with shem and and iapheth the sonnes of nah and noahs wife and the thre wiues of his sonnes with the into them arke.
 they and euerie beast after his kinde and all cattel after their kinde and euerie thyng that crepeth and moueth vpon the earth after kinde and euerie foule after his kinde euen euerie birde of euerie fether.
 for they came to nah into the arke two two of al flesh wherein is the breath of life and they entryng in came male and female of all flesh as god had commanded him.
 and the lord shut him in.
 then the flood was fourty dayes vpon the earth the waters were increased bare vp the arke which was lifte vp aboue the earth the waters also waxed strong and were increased excedingly vpon the earth and the arke went vpon the waters.
 the waters preuailed so excedingly vpon the earth that all the high mountaines that are vnder the whole heauen were couered.
 fiftene cubites vpwarde did the waters preuaile when the mountaines were couered then all flesh perished that moued vpon the earth bothe foule and cattell and beast and euerie thing that crepeth and moueth vpom the earth and euerie man.
 huerie thing in whose nostrels the spirit of life did breathe whatsoeuer they were in the drye land they dyed.
 so he destroyed euerie thing that was vpon the earth from man to beast to the creping thing and to the foule of the heauen.
 they were euen destroyed from the earth noah onely remained and they that were with him in the arke.
 and the waters preuailed vpon the earth an hundreth and fiftie dayes.
 now god remembred nah and euerie beast and al the cattel that was with him in the arke.
 therfore god made a winde to passe vpon the earth the waters ceased the fountaines also of the depe and the of heauen were stopped and the from heauen was restrained.
 and the waters returned from aboue the earth going and returning.
 and after the end of the hundreth and fiftieth day the waters abated.
 and in the seuenth moneth in the seuententh day of the moneth the arke rested vpon the mountaines of ararat.
 and the waters were going and decreasing vntil the tenth moneth.
 in the tenth moneth and in the first day of the moneth were the toppes of the mountaines sene.
 so after fourty dayes nah opened the windowe of the arke which he had made.
 and sent forth a rauen whiche went out going forth and returning vntill the waters were dryed vp vpon the earth.
 againe he sent a doue from him that he might se if the waters were diminished from of the earth.
 but the doue founde no rest for the sole of her foote.
 therefore returned vnto hym into the arke for the waters were vppon the whole earth and he put forth his hand and toke her and pulled her to him into the arke.
 and he abode yet other seuen dayes and againe he sent forthe the doue out of the arke.
 and the doue came to him in the euenyng and lo in her mouthe was an oliue leafe that she had pluct.
 whereby nah knewe that the waters were abated from of the earth notwithstanding he waited yet other seuen dayes and sent forth the doue which returned not againe vnto him any more.
 and in the six hundreth and one yere in the first daie of the first moneth the waters were dryed vp from of the earth.
 and nah remoued the couering of the arke loked beholde the vpper parte of the grounde was drye.
 and in the seconde moneth in the seuen and twentieth day of the moneth was the earth drye.
 then god spake to nah saying.
 go forthe of the arke thou and thy wife thy sonnes thy sonnes with thee.
 bring forthe with thee euerie beast that is with thee of al flesh bothe foule cattel and euerie thing that crepeth and moueth vpon the earth that they maye brede abundantly in the earth and bring forthe frute and increase vpon the earth.
 so nah came forthe and his sonnes and his wife and his sonnes wiues with him.
 beast euerie creping thing and deuerie foule all that moueth vpon the earth after their kindes went out of the arke.
 then nah buylt an altar to the lord and toke of euerie cleane beast and of euerie cleane foule and offred burnt offrings vpon the altar.
 and the lord smelled a sauour of rest the lord said in his heart i wil henceforthe curse the ground no more for mans cause.
 for the imaginacion of mans heart is euil euen from his youth.
 nether wil i smite anie more all things liuing as i haue done.
 hereafter sede time and haruest and colde and heate and sommer and winter and daye and night shal not cease so long as the earth remaineth.
 and god blessed noah and his sonnes and said to them bring forthe frute and multiplie and replenish the earth.
 also the feare of you and the dread of you shalbe vpon beast of the earth vpon foule of the heauen vpon al that moueth on the earth and vpon all the fishes of the sea.
 into your hand are they deliuered.
 euerie thing that moueth and liueth shalbe meat for you.
 as the grene herbe haue i giuen you all things.
 but flesh with the life thereof i meane with the blood thereof shall ye not eat.
 for surely i wil require your blood wherein your liues are.
 at the hand of euery beast wil i require it.
 and at the hand of man euen at the hand of a mans brother will i require the life of man.
 who so shedeth mans blood by man shall his blood be shed.
 for in the image of god hathe he made man.
 but bryng forthe frute and multiplie.
 growe plentifully in the earth and increase therein.
 god spake also to nah and to his sonnes with him saying.
 beholde i euen i establishe my couenant with you and with your sede after you.
 and with euerie liuing creature that is with you with the foule with the cattel and with euerie beast of the earth with you from al that go out of the arke vnto euerie beast of the earth.
 and my couenaunt will i establishe wyth you that frome henceforthe all fleshe shall not be rooted out by the waters of the flood nether shall there be a flood to destroye the earth any more.
 then god said this is the token of the couenant which i make betwene me and you and betwene euerie liuing thing that is with you vnto perpetual generacions.
 i haue set my bowe in the cloude and it shalbe for a signe of the couenant betwene me and the earth.
 and when i shall couer the earth wyth a cloude the bow shal be sene in the cloud.
 then wil i remember my couenant which is betwene me and you and betwene euerie liuing thyng in all fleshe and there shalbe no more waters of a flood to destroye all flesh.
 therfore the bow shalbe in the cloude that i may se it and remember the euerlasting couenant betwene god and euerie liuing thing in all flesh that is vpon the earth.
 god said yet to noah this is the signe of the couenant whiche i haue established betwene me and all flesh that is vpon the earth.
 now the sonnes of nah goyng forthe of the arke were shem and ham and iapheth.
 and ham is the father of canaan.
 these are the thre sonnes of noah and of them was the whole earth ouerspred.
 noah also began to be an housband man and planted a vinearde.
 and he dronke of the wine and was dronken and was vncouered in the middes of his tent.
 and when ham the father of canaam sawe the nakednes of hys father he tolde hys two brethren without.
 then toke shem and iapheth a garment and put it vppon bothe their shulders and went backward and couered the nakednes of their father with their faces backe warde.
 so they sawe not their fathers nakednes.
 then noah awoke frome hys wyne and knewe what his yonger sonne had done vnto hym.
 and said cursed be canaan.
 a seruant of seruantes shal he be vnto his brethren.
 he sayd moreouer blessed be the lorde god of shem and let canaan be hys seruant.
 god persuade iapheth that he may dwel in the tentes of shem and let canaan be his seruant.
 and noah liued after the flood thre hundreth and fifty yeres.
 so all the dayes of noah were nyne hundreth and fifty yeres.
 and he dyed.
 nowe these are the generacions of the sonnes of noah shem ham and iapheth.
 vnto whom sonnes were borne after the flood.
 the sonnes of iapheth were gomer and magog and madai and iauan and tubal and meshech and tiras.
 and the sonnes of gomer ashkenaz and ri phath and togarmah.
 also the sonnes of iauan elishah and tarshish kittim and dodanim.
 of these were the yles of the gentiles deuided in their landes euerie man after hys tongue and after their families in their nacions.
 moreouer the sonnes of ham were cush and mizraim and put and canaan.
 and the sonnes of cush seba and hauilah and sabtah and raamah and sabtecha.
 also the sonnes of raamah were sheba and dedan.
 and cush begate nimrod who began to be mighty in the earth.
 he was a myghty hunter before the lorde wherefore it is said as nimrod the myghty hunter before the lord.
 and the begynning of hys kyngdome was babel and erech and accad and calneh in the land of shinar.
 out of that lande came asshur and buylded niniueh and the citie rehoboth and calah.
 resen also betwene niniueh and calah.
 this is a great citie.
 and mizraim begate ludim and anamim and lehabim and naphtuhim.
 pathrusim also and casluhim out of whom came the philistims and caphtorims.
 also canaan begate zidon his first borne and heth.
 and iebusi and emori and girgashi.
 and hiui and arki and sini and aruadi and zemari and hamathy.
 and afterwarde were the families of the canaanites spred abroad.
 then the border of the canaanites was from zidon as thou commest to gerar vntil azzah and as thou goest vnto sodom and gomorah and admah and zeboiim euen vnto lasha.
 these are the sonne of ham accordyng to their families according to their tongues in their countreis and in their nacions.
 vnto shem also the father of all the sonnes of eber and elder brother of iapheth were children borne.
 the sonnes of shem were elam and asshur and arpachshad and lud and aram.
 and the sonnes of aram vz and hul and gether and mash.
 also arpachshad begate shelah.
 and shelah begate eber.
 vnto eber also were borne two sonnes.
 the name of the one was peleg.
 for in his dayes was the earth diuided.
 and his brothers name was ioktan.
 then ioktan begate almodad and sheleph.
 and hazarmaueth and ierab and hadoram and vzal and dicklah.
 and obal and abimael.
 and sheba.
 and ophir and hauilah and iobab al these were the sonnes of ioktan.
 and their dwellyng was from mesha.
 as thou goest vnto sephara mount of the east.
 these are the sonnes of shem according to their families.
 according to their tongues in their countreis and nacions.
 these are the families of the sonnes of nah after their generacions among their people.
 and out of these were the nacions diuided in the earth after the flood.
 then the whole earth was of one language and one speache.
 and as they went frome the easte they founde a plaine in the lande of shinr and there they abode.
 and they sayd one to another come let vs make brycke and burne it in the fire.
 so they had brycke for stone and slyme had they in steade of morter.
 also they said go to let vs builde vs a citie and a tower whose toppe may reache vnto the heauen that we may get vs a name lest we be scatred vpon the whole earth.
 but the lord came downe to se the citie and tower whiche the sonnes of men buylded.
 and the lord said beholde the people is one and they all haue one language and this they begynne to do nether can they now be stopped from whatsoeuer they haue imagined to do.
 come on let vs go downe and there their language that euerie one perceiue not anothers speache.
 so the lord scattred them frome thence vppon all the earth and they left of to buylde the citie.
 therefore the name of it was called babel because the lorde did there confounde the language of all the earth.
 frome thence then did the lorde scater them vpon all the earth.
 these are the generacions of shem.
 shem was an hundreth yere olde and begate arpachshad two yere after the flood.
 and shem liued after he begate arpachshad fiue hundreth yeres and begate sonnes and daughters.
 also arpachshad liued siue and thirty yeres.
 and begte shelah.
 and arpachshad liued after he begate shelah foure hundreth and thre yeres d begate sonnes and daughters.
 and shelah liued thyrty yeres and begate eber.
 so shelah liued after he begate eber foure hundreth and thre yeres and be gate sonnes and daughters.
 eber liued foure and thirty yeres and begate peleg.
 so eber liued after he begate peleg foure hundreth and thirty yeres and begate sonnes and daughters.
 and peleg liued thirty yeres and begate reu.
 and peleg liued after he begate reu two hundreth and nine yeres and begate sonnes and daughters.
 also reu liued two and thirty yeres and begate serug.
 so reu lyued after he begate serug two hundreth and seuen yeres and begate sonnes and daughters.
 moreouer serug liued thirty yeres and begate nahor.
 and serug liued after he begate nahor two hundreth yeres and begate sonnes and daughters.
 and nahor liued nine and twenty yeres and begate terah.
 so nahr lyued after he begate terah an hundreth and ninetene yeres and begate sonnes and daughters.
 so trah liued seuentie yeres and begate abram nahor and haran.
 now these are the generacions of terah terah begate abram nahor and haran.
 and haran begate lot.
 then haran dyed before terah hys father in the lande of hys natiuitie in vr of the caldees.
 so abram and nahor toke them wiues the name of abrams wyfe was sarai and the name of nahors wife milcah the daughter of haran the father of milcah and the father of iscah.
 but sarai was barren and had no childe.
 then terah toke abrm hys sonne and lot the sonne of haran hys sonnes sonne and sarai hys daughter in lawe hys sonne abrams wyfe.
 and they departed together from vr of the caldees to go into the land of canaan and they came to haran and dwelt there.
 so the dayes of tarah were two hundreth and fiue yeres and dyed in haran.
 for the lord had said vnto abram get thee out of thy countrey and from thy kinred and from thy fathers house vnto the land that i will shewe thee.
 and i wil make of thee a greate nacion and wil blesse thee and make thy name great thou shalt be a blessing.
 i wil also blesse them that blesse thee curse them that curse thee and in thee shall all families of the earth be blessed.
 so abram departed euen as the lord spake vnto him and lot went with him.
 and abram was seuenty and fiue yere olde when he departed out of haran then abram toke sarai his wife and lot his brothers sonne and al their substance that they possessed and the soules that they had gotten in haran and they departed to go to the of canaan.
 to the land of canaan they came.
 so abram passed through the land vnto the place of shechem and vnto the plaine of moreh and the canaanite was then in the land and the lord appeared vnto abram said vnto thy sede wil i giue this land.
 and there builded he an altar vnto the lord whiche appeared vnto him.
 afterward remouing thence vnto a mountaine eastward frome bethel he pitched his tent hauing bethel on the westside and haai on the east.
 and there he buylt an altar vnto the lord and called on the name of the lord.
 againe abram went forth going and iourneing towarde the south.
 then there came a famine in the land.
 therefore abram went downe into egypt to soiourne there.
 for there was a greate famine in the land.
 and when he drewe nere to entre into egypt he said to sarai his wife beholde now i know that thou art a faire woman to loke vpon.
 therefore it wil come to passe that when the egyptians se thee thei wil say she is his wife.
 so wil they kill me but they will kepe thee aliue.
 say i pray thee that thou art my sister that i may fare wel for thy sake and that my life may be preserued by thee.
 now when abram was come into egipt the egyptians beheld the woman.
 for she was very faire.
 and the princes of pharaoh sawe her and commended her vnto pharaoh.
 so the woman was taken into pharaohs house.
 who intreated abram wel for her sake and he had shepe and beues and he asses and men seruantes and maide seruantes and she asses and camelles.
 but the lord plagued pharaoh his house with great plagues because of sarai abrams wife.
 then pharah called abram and said why hast thou done this vnto me.
 wherefore didest thou not tell me that she was thy wife.
 why say dest thou she is my sister that i shulde take her to be my wife.
 now therefore beholde thy wife take her and go thy way.
 and pharah gaue men commandement concernyng hym.
 and they conueied hym forthe and his wife and all that he had.
 then abrm went vp from egypt he his wife and all that he had and lot with him towarde the south.
 and abram was very riche in cattell in siluer and in golde.
 and he went on his iourney from the south toward to the place where his tent had bene at the beginning betwene bethel and haai.
 vnto the place of the altar whiche he had made there at the first.
 and there abram called on the name of the lord.
 lot also who went with abram had shepe cattel and tentes.
 so that the land colde not beare them that they might dwel together.
 for their substance was great so that they colde not dwel together.
 also there was debate betwene the herdmen of abrams cattell and the herdmen of lots cattel and the cananites and the perizzites dwelled at that time in the land.
 then said abram vnto lot let there be no strife i pray thee betwene thee me nether betwene mine herdmen and thine herd men.
 for we be brethren.
 is not the whole land before thee.
 departe i pray thee from me.
 if thou wilt take the left hand then i wil go to the right.
 or if thou go to the right hand then i wil take the left.
 so when lot lifted vp his eies he sawe that all the plaine of iorden was watered euerie where.
 for before the lord destroyed sodm and gomorh it was as the garden of the lord like the land of egypt as thou goest vnto zar.
 then lot chose vnto him all the plaine of iorden and toke his iourney from the east.
 and they departed the one from the other.
 abram dwelled in the land of and lot abode in the cities of the plaine pitched his ten teuen to sodm.
 now the men of sodm were wicked and exceading sinners against the lord.
 then the lord said vnto abram after that lot was departed from him lift vp thine eies now and loke from the place where thou art northward and southward and eastward and westward.
 for all the land which thou seest wil i giue vnto thee and to thy sede for euer and i wil make thy sede as the dust of the earth.
 so that if a man can nomber the dust of the earth then shal thy sede be nombred.
 arise walke throught the land in the lenght thereof and bredth thereof.
 for i wil giue it vnto thee.
 then abram remoued his tent and came and dwelled in the plaine of mamre is in hebrn and buylded there an altar vnto the lord.
 and in the daies of amraphel king of shinar arioch king of ellasar chedorlamer king of elam and tidal king of the nacions.
 these men made warre with bera king of sodom and with birsha king of gomorah shinab king of admah shemeber king of zeboilm and the king of bela which is zar.
 all these ioyned together in the vale of siddm which is the salte sea.
 twelue yeres were they subiect to chedorlamer but in the thirtenthe yere they rebelled.
 and in the fourtenth yere came chedorlamer and the kings that were with him and smote the rephaims in ashterth karnam and the zuzims in ham and the emims in shaueh kiriathaim.
 and the horites in their mount seir vnto the plaine of paran which is by the wildernes and thei returned and came to enmishpat which is kadesh and smote all the countrie of the amalekites and also the amorites that dwelled in hazezontamar.
 then went out the king of sodom and the king of gomorah and the king of admah and the king of and the king of b la which is zar.
 and thei ioyned battel with them in the vale of siddim.
 to wit with chedorlamer king of elam and tidal king of nacions and king of shinr and arih king of ellasar.
 foure kings against fiue.
 now the vale of.
 siddim was ful of slyme pittes and the kings of sodm and gomorah fled and fel there.
 and the residue fled to the mountaine.
 then thei toke all the substance of sodm and gomorah and all their vitailes and went their waie.
 thei toke lot also abrams brothers sonne and his substance for he dwelt at sodm and departed.
 then came one that had escaped tolde abram the ebrewe which dwelt in the plaine of mamre the amorite brother of eshcl and brother of aner which were confederat with abram.
 when abram heard that his brother was taken he broght forthe of them that were borne and broght vp in his house thre hundreth eightene pursued the vnto dan.
 then he and his seruantes diuided themselues against them by night and smote them and pursued them vnto hobah which is on the left side of damascus.
 and he recouered all the substance and also broght againe his brother lot his goods and the women also and the people.
 after that he returned from the slaughter of chedorlamer and of the kings that were with him came the king of sodom for the to mete him in the valley of shaueh which is the kings dale.
 and melchizedek king of shalem broght forthe bread and wine.
 and he was a priest of the moste high god.
 therfore he blessed him saying blessed art thou.
 abram of god moste high possessor of heauen and and blessed be the moste high god which hathe deliuered thine ennemies into thine hand.
 and abram gaue him tithe of all.
 then the king of sodom said to abram giue me the personnes and take the goods to thy selfe.
 and abram said to the king of sodm i haue lift vp mine hand vnto the lord the moste high god possessor of heauen and earth.
 that i wil not take of all that is thine so muche as a threde or shoulachet lest thou shuldest saie i haue made abramriche saue onely that which the yong men haue eaten and the partes of the men which went with me anr eshcl and mamre.
 let them take their partes.
 after these things the worde of the lord came vnto abram in a vision saying feare not abram i am thy buckler and thine exceading great rewarde.
 and abram said o lord god what wilt thou giue me seing i go childeles and the stuarde of mine house is this eliezer of damascus.
 againe abram said beholde to me thou hast giuen no sede.
 wherfore lo a seruant of mine house shalbe mine heire.
 then beholde the worde of the lord came vnto him saying he shal not be thine heire but one that shal come out of thine owne bowelles he shalbe thine heire.
 moreouer he broght him forthe and said loke vp now vnto heauen and tell the starres if thou be able to nombre them.
 and he said vnto him so shall thy sede be.
 and abram beleued the lord and he counted that to him for righteousnes.
 againe he said vnto him i am the lord that broght thee out of vr of the caldees to giue thee this land to inherit it.
 and he said o lord god whereby shall i knowe that i shal inherit it.
 then he said vnto him take me an heyfer of thre yeres olde and a she goate of thre yeres olde and a ramme of thre yeres olde a doue also and a pigion.
 so he toke al these vnto him and diuided them in the middes and laied euerie pece one against another.
 but the birdes diuided he not.
 then foules fel on the carkases abram droue them awaie.
 and when the sunne went downe there fel an heauei slepe vpon abrm.
 and lo a verie feareful darcknes fel vpon him.
 then he said to abram knowe this of a suretie that thy sede shall be a stranger in a land that is not theirs foure hundreth yeres and shal serue them.
 and they shall entreate them euill.
 not withstanding the nacion whome they shal serue wil i iudge.
 afterward shal they come out with great substance.
 but thou shalt go vnto thy fathers in peace and shalt be buryed in a good age.
 and in the fourthe generacion they shall come hether againe.
 for the wickednes of the amorites is not yet ful.
 also when the sunne went downe there was a darckenes.
 and beholde a smoking furnace and a fire brande whiche went betwene those peces.
 in that same day the lord made a coueuant with abram saying vnto thy sede haue i giuen this land from the riuer of egipt vnto the great riuer the riuer euphrates.
 the kenites and the kenizites and the kadmonites.
 and the hittites and the perizzites and the repahms.
 the amorites also and the canaanites and the girgashites and the iebusites.
 now sarai abrams wife bare him no children she had a maide an egiptian hagar by name.
 and sarai said vnto abram beholde now the lord hathe restrayned me from childe bearing.
 i pray thee go in vnto my maide.
 it may be that i shall receiue a childe by her.
 and abram obeied the voice of sarai.
 then sarai abrams wife toke hagar her maide the egyptian after abram had dwelled ten yere in the land of canaan and gaue her to her housband abram for his wife.
 and he went in vnto hagar and she conceiued and when she sawe that she had conceiued her dame was despised in her eies.
 then sarai said to abram thou doest me wrong i haue giuen my maide into thy bosome and she seeth that she hath conceiued and i am despised in her eies.
 the lord iudge betwene me and thee.
 then abram said to sari beholde thy maide is in thine hand.
 do with her as it pleaseth thee.
 then sarai delt roughly with her.
 wherefore she fled from her.
 but the angel of the lord founde her beside a fountaine of water in the wildernes by the fountaine in the way to shur.
 and he said hagar sarais maide whence comest thou.
 and whether wilt thou go.
 and she said i flee from my dame sari.
 the of the lord said to her returne to thy dame and humble thy self vnder her handes.
 againe the angel of the lord said vnto her i wil so greatly encrease thy sede that it shal not be nombred for multitude.
 also the angel of the lord said vnto her.
 se thou art with childe and shalt beare a sonne and shalt cal his name ishmael.
 for the lord hathe heard thy tribulation.
 and he shal be a wilde man.
 his hand shalbe against euerie man euerie mans hand against him and he shall dwell in the presence of all his brethren.
 then she called the name of the lord that spake vnto her thou god lokest on me.
 for she said haue i not also here loked after him that seeth me.
 wherefore the well was called beerla hairoi lo it is betwene kadesh and bered.
 and hagar bare abram a sonne abram called his sonnes name whiche hagar bare ishmael.
 and abram was foure score and sixe yere olde when hagar bare him ishmael.
 when abram was ninety yere olde and nine the lorde appeared to abram and said vnto hym i am god all sufficient walke before me and be thou vpright.
 and i will make my couenant betwene me and thee and i will multiply thee exceadingly.
 then abram fel on his face and god talked with hym saying.
 beholde i make my couenant with thee thou shalt be a father of manie nacions.
 nether shall thy name anie more be called abram but thy name shalbe abraham.
 for a father of manie nacions haue i made thee.
 also i wil make thee exceading fruteful and wil make nacions of thee.
 yea kings shal procede of thee.
 moreouer i wil establish my couenant betwene me and thee and thy sede after thee in their generacions for an euerlasting couenant to be god vnto thee and to thy sede after thee.
 and i wil giue thee and thy sede after thee the land wherein thou art a stranger euen al the land of canaan for an euerlasting possession and i wil be their god.
 againe god said vnto abraham thou also shalt kepe my couenant thou and thy sede after thee in their generacions.
 this is my couenant which ye shal kepe betwene me and you and thy sede after thee let euerie man childe among you be circumcised.
 that is ye shal circumcise the foreskin of your flesh and it shal be a signe of the couenant betwene me and you.
 and euerie man childe of eight daies olde among you shalbe circumcised in your generacions aswel he that is borne in thine house as he that is boght with money of any stranger which is not of thy sede.
 he that is borne in thine house and he that is boght with thy money must nedes be circumcised.
 so my couenant shal be in your flesh for an euerlasting couenant.
 but the vncircumcised man childe in whose slesh the foreskinne is not circumcised euen that personne shal be cut of from his people because he hathe broken my couenant.
 afterward god said vnto abraham sarai thy wife shalt thou not call sari but sarah shalbe her name.
 and i wil blesse her and wil also giue thee a sonne of her yea i wil blesse her and she shalbe the mother of nations.
 kings also of people shal come of her.
 then abraham fel vpon his face and laughed and said in his heart shal a childe be borne vnto him that is an hundreth yere olde.
 and shal sarah that is ninety yere olde beare.
 and abraham said vnto god oh that ishmael might liue in thy sight.
 then god said sarah thy wife shal beare thee a sonne in dede and thou shalt call his name izhak.
 and i wil establish my couenant with him for an euerlasting couenant and with his sede after him.
 and as concerning ishmael i haue heard thee.
 lo i haue blessed him and wil make him fruteful and wil multiplie him exceadingly twelue princes shal he beget and i wil make a great nacion of him.
 but my couenant wil i establish with izhak which sarah shal beare vnto thee the next yere at this season.
 and he left of talking with him and god went vp from abraham.
 then abraham toke ishmael his sonne and all that were borne in his house and all that was boght with his money that is euerie man childe among the men of abrahams house and he circumcised the foreskinne of their flesh in that self same day as god had commanded him.
 abraham also him selfe was ninety yere olde and nine when the foreskinne of his flesh was circumcised.
 and ishmael his sonne was thirtene yere olde when the foreskinne of his flesh was circumcised.
 the selfe same day was abraham circumcised and ishmael his sonne.
 and all the men of his house bothe borne in his house and boght with money of the stranger were circumcised with him.
 againe the lord appeared vnto him in the plaine of mamre as he sate in his tent dore about the heate of the day.
 and he lift vp his eies and loked.
 and lo thre men stode by him and when he sawe them he ran to mete them from the tent dore and bowed him selfe to the grounde.
 and he said lord if i haue now found fauour in thy sight go not i praie thee from thy seruant.
 let a litle water i pray you be broght and wash your fete and rest your selues vnder the tre.
 and i wil bring a morsel of bread that you may comfort your heartes afterwarde ye shal go your waies.
 for therfore are ye come to your seruant.
 and they said do euen as thou hast said.
 then abraham made haste into the tent vnto sarah and said make ready at once thre measures of fine meale.
 knede it and make cakes vpon the herthe.
 and abraham ran to the beastes and toke a tender and good calfe and gaue it to the seruant who hasted to make it ready.
 and he toke butter and milke and the calfe which he had prepared and set before them and stode him selfe by them vnder the tre thei did eat.
 then thei said to him where is sarah thy wife.
 and he answered beholde she is in the tent.
 and he said i wil certeinly come againe vnto thee according to the time of life.
 and lo sarah thy wife shal haue a sonne.
 and sarah heard in the tent dore which was behinde him.
 now abraham and sarah were olde and stryken in age and it ceased to be with sarah after the maner of women therfore sarah laughed within her selfe saying after i am waxed olde and my lord also shal i haue lust.
 and the lord said vnto abraham wherfore did sarah thus laugh saying shal i certeinly beare a childe which am olde.
 shal anie thing be hard to the lord.
 at the time appointed wil i returne vnto thee euen according to the time of life and sarah shal haue a sonne.
 but sarah denied saying i laughed not.
 for she was afraied.
 and he said it is not so.
 for thou laughedst.
 afterward the men did rise vp from thence and loked toward sodom.
 and abraham went with them to bring them out the waie.
 and the lord said shal i hide from abraham that thing which i do seing that abraham shalbe in dede a great and a mightie nacion and all the nacions of the earth shal be blessed in him.
 for i knowe him that he wil commande his sonnes and his housholde after him that thei kepe the waie of the lord to do righteousnes and iudgement that the lord maie bring vpon abraham that he hathe spoken vnto him.
 then the lord said because the crie of sodm and gomorah is great because their sinne is exceading grieuous i wil go downe now and se whether thei haue done altogether according to that crie which is come vnto me.
 and if not that i maie knowe.
 and the men turned thence and went toward sodm.
 but abraham stode yet before the lord.
 then abraham drewe nere said wilt thou also destroie the righteous with the wicked.
 if there be fiftie righteous within the citie wilt thou destroie and not spare the place for the fiftie righteous that are therein.
 be it farre from thee from doing this thing to slay the righteous with the wicked.
 and that the righteous shuld be euen as the wicked be it farre from thee shal not the iudge of all the worlde do right.
 and the lord answered if i shal finde in sodom fifty righteous within the citie then wil i spare all the place for their sakes.
 then abraham answered and said beholde now i haue begonne to speake vnto my lord and i am but dust and asihes.
 if there shal lacke fiue of fiftie righteous wilt thou destroie all the citie for fiue.
 and he said if i finde there fiue and fourty i wil not destroie it.
 and he yet spake to him againe and said what if there shalbe founde fourtie.
 then he answered i wil not do it for fourties sake.
 againe he said let not my lord now be angry that i speake what if thirtie be founde there.
 then he said i wil not do it if i finde thirtie there.
 moreouer he said beholde now i haue begonne to spake vnto my lord what if twentie be founde there.
 and he answered i will not destroie it for twenties sake.
 then he said let not my lord be now angrie and i will speake but this once what if ten be founde there.
 and he answered i will destroie it for tens sake.
 and the lord went his waye when he had left communing with abraham and abraham returned vnto his place.
 and in the euening their came two angels to sodm.
 and lot sate at the gate of sodm and lot sawe them and rose vp to mete them and he bowed him selfe with his face to the grownd.
 and he said se my lords i praye you turne in now into your seruants house and tarie all night and wash your fete and ye shall rise vp early and go your waies.
 who said naie but we will abide in the strete all night.
 then he preased vpon them earnestly and they turned into him and came to his house and he made them a feast and did bake vnleauened bread and they did eat.
 but before they went to bed the men of the citie euen the men of sodm compassed the house round about from the yong to the olde al the people from al quarters.
 who crying vnto lot said to him where are the men whiche came to thee this night.
 bring them out vnto vs that we maie know them.
 then lot went out at the dore vnto them and shut the dore after him.
 and said i praie you my brethren do not so wickedly.
 beholde now i haue two daughters which haue not knowen man.
 then wil i bring out now vnto you and do to them as semeth you good.
 onely vnto these men do nothyng for therefore are they come vnder the shadowe of my rofe.
 then they said awaie hence and they said he is come alone as a stranger and shall he iudge and rule.
 we wil now deale worse with thee then with them.
 so they preased sore vpon lot himself came to breake the dore but the men put forthe their hand and pulled lot into the house to them and shut to the dore.
 then they smote the men that were at the dore of the house with blindenes bothe smale and great so that thei were wearie in seking the dore.
 then the men said vnto lot whome hast thou yet here.
 ether sonne in lawe or thy sonnes or thy daughters or whatsoeuer thou hast in the citie bring it out of this place.
 for we wil destroie this place because the crie of them is great before the lord and the lord hathe sent vs to destroie it.
 then lot went out and spake vnto his sonnes in lawe which maried his daughters said arise get you out of this place.
 for the lord wil destroie the citie.
 but he semed to his sonnes in lawe as thogh he had mocked and when the morning arose the hasted lot saying arise take thy wife thy two daughters which are here lest thou be destroied in the punishment of the citie.
 and as he prolonged the time the men caught both him and his wife and his two daughters by the handes the lord being mercifull vnto hym and they broght hym forthe and set him without the citie.
 and when they had broght them out the angel said.
 escape for thy life.
 loke not behinde thee nether tarie thou in al the plaine escape into the mountaine lest thou be destroyed.
 and lot said vnto them not so i praie thee my lord.
 beholde now thy seruant hathe founde grace in thy sight and thou hast magnified thy mercie whiche thou hast shewed vnto me in sauyng my life.
 and i can not escape in the mountaine lest some euil take me i die.
 se now this citie hereby to flee vnto whiche is a litle one.
 oh let me escape thither.
 is it not a litle one and my soule shall liue.
 then he said vnto him beholde i haue receiued thy request also concernyng thys thing that i will not ouerthrowe this citie for the whiche thou hast spoken.
 haste thee saue thee there.
 for i can do nothing till thou become thether.
 therefore the name of the citie was called zar.
 the sunne did rise vpon the earth when lot entred into zar then the lord rained vpon sodm and vpon gomorah brimstone and fire from the lord out of heauen.
 and ouerthrewe those cities and all the plaine and all the inhabitants of the cities and that that grewe vpon the earth.
 now his wife behinde him loked backe and was turned into a piller of salt.
 and abraham rising vp early in the morning went to the place where he had stand before the lord and loking toward sodm and gomorah and toward al the land of the plaine.
 beholde he sawe the smoke of the land mounting vp as the smoke of a fornace.
 but yet when god destroied the cities of the plaine god thoght vpon abraham and sent lot out from the middes of the destruction he ouerthrew the cities wherein lot dwelled.
 then lot went vp from zar and dwelt in the mountaine with his two daughters.
 for he feared to tarie in zoar but dwelt in a caue he and his two daughters.
 and the elder said vnto the yonger our father is olde and there is not a man in the earth to come in vnto vs after the maner of all the earth.
 come we wil make our father drinke wine and lye with him that we maie preserue sede of our father.
 so thei made their father drinke wine that night and the elder went and laie with her father.
 but he perceiued not nether when she laie downe nether when she rose vp.
 and on the morow the elder said to the yonger beholde yester night laie i with my father.
 let vs make him drinke wine this night also and go thou and lye with him that we maie preserue sede of our father.
 so thei made their father drinke wine that night also and the yonger arose laie with him but he perceiued not when she laie downe nether when she rose vp thus were both the daughters of lot with childe by their father.
 and the elder bare a sonne and she called his name moab.
 the same is the father of the moabites vnto this daie.
 and the yonger bare a sonne also and she called his name benammi.
 the same is the father of the ammonites vnto this daie.
 afterwarde abraham departed thence toward the south countrie and dwelled betwene cadesh and shur and soiourned in gerar.
 andabraham said of sarah his wife she is my sister.
 them abimelech king of gerar sent and toke sarah.
 but god came to abimelech in a dreame by night and said to him beholde thou art but dead because of the woman which thou hast taken.
 for she is a mans wife.
 notwithstanding abimelech had not yet come nere her and he said lord wilt thou slaie euen the righteous nacion.
 said not he vnto me she is my sister.
 yea and she her selfe said he is my brother.
 with an vpright minde and innocent hands haue i done this.
 and god said vnto him by a dreame i knowe that thou didest this euen with an vpright minde and i kept thee also that thou shuldest not sinne against me.
 therfore suffred i thee not to touche her.
 now then deliuer the man his wife againe.
 for he is a prophet and he shal praye for thee that thou mayestliue.
 but if thou deliuer her not againe be sure that thou shalt die the death thou and all that thou hast.
 then abimelech rising vp early in the morning called all his seruantes tolde all these thynges vnto them and the men were sore afraide.
 afterward abimelech called abraham and said vnto him what hast thou done vnto vs.
 what haue i offended thee that thou hast broght on me and on my kingdome this great sinne.
 thou hast done things vnto me that ought not to be done.
 so abimelech said vnto abraham what sawest thou that thou hast done this thing.
 then abraham answered because i thoght thus surely the feare of god is not in this place and they wil slay me for my wiues sake.
 yet in very dede she is my sister.
 for she is the daughter of my father but not the daughter of my mother and she is my wife.
 now when god caused me to wandre out of my fathers house i said them to her this is thy kindenes that thou shalt shewe vnto me in all places where we come say thou of me he is my brother.
 then toke abimelech shepe and beues and men seruantes and women seruantes and gaue them vnto abraham and restored him sarah his wife.
 and abimelech said behold my land is before thee.
 dwel where it pleaseth thee.
 like wise to sarh he said beholde i haue giuen thy brother a thousand peces of siluer beholde he is the vaile of thine eies to all that are with thee and to all others.
 and she was thus reproued.
 then abrahm praied vnto god and god healed abimelech and his wife his maid seruants.
 and they bare children.
 for the lord had shut vp euerie wombe of the house of abimelech because of sarah abrahams wife.
 now the lord visited sarah as he had said and did vnto her according as he had promised.
 for sarah conceiued and bare abraham a sonne in his olde age at the same season that god tolde him.
 and abraham called his sonnes name that was borne vnto him which sarah bare him izhak.
 then abraham circumcised izhak his sonne when he was eight daies olde as god had commanded him.
 so abraham was an hundreth yere olde when his sonne izhak was borne vnto him.
 then sarah said god hathe made me to reioyce.
 all that heare wil reioyce with me.
 againe she said who wolde haue said to abraham that sarah shulde haue giuen children sucke.
 for i haue borne him a sonne in his olde age.
 then the childe grewe and was weaned.
 and abraham made a great feast the same day that izhak was weaned.
 and sarah sawe the sonne of hagar the egyptian which she had borne vnto abraham mocking.
 wherefore she said vnto abraham cast out this bond woman and her sonne.
 for the sonne of this bond woman shal not be heire with my sonne izhak.
 and this thing was very grieuous in abrahams sight because of his sonne.
 but god said vnto abraham let it not be grieuous in thy sight for the childe and for thy bond woman.
 in all that sarah shal saie vnto thee heare her voyce for in izhak shal thy sede be called.
 as for the sonne of the bond woman i wil make him a nacion also because he is thy sede.
 so abraham arose vp early in the morning and toke bread and a bottel of water and gaue it vnto hagar putting it on her shulder and the childe also and sent her away.
 who departing wandred in the wildernes of beersheba.
 and when the water of the bottelwas spent she cast the childe vnder a certeinetre.
 then she went and sate her ouer against him a farre of about a bowe shote.
 for she said i wil not se the death of the childe and she sate downe ouer against him and lift vp her voyce and wept.
 then god heard the voyce of the childe and the angel of god called to hagar from heauen and said vnto her what aileth thee hagar.
 feare not for god hathe heard the voyce of the childe where he is.
 arise take vp the childe and holde him in thine hand.
 for i wil make of him a great people.
 and god opened her eies and she sawe a well of water so she went and filled the bottel with water and gaue the boye drinke.
 so god was with the childe and he grewe and dwelt in the wildernes and was an archer.
 and he dwelt in the wildernes of paran and his mother toke him a wife out of the land of egypt.
 and at that same time abimelech and phichl his chief captaine spake vnto abraham saying god is with thee in all that thou doest.
 now therefore sweare vnto me here by god that thou wilt not hurt me nor my children nor my childrens children.
 thou shalt deale with me and with the countrie where thou hast bene a stranger according vnto the kindenes that i haue shewed thee.
 then abraham said i wil sweare.
 and abraham rebuked abimelech for a well of water which abimelechs seruants had violently taken away.
 and abimelech said i knowe not who hathe done this thing.
 also thou toldest me not nether heard i of it but this daie.
 then abraham toke shepe and beues and gaue them vnto abimelech.
 and they two made a couenant.
 and abraham set seuen lambes of the flocke by themselues.
 then abimelech said vnto abraham what meane these seuen lambes which thou hast set by themselues.
 and he answered because thou shalt receiue of mine hand these seuen lambes that it may be a witnes vnto me that i haue digged this well.
 wherefore the place is called beersheba because there thei bothe sware.
 thus made they a couenant at beersheba and phichl his chief captaine rose vp and turned againe vnto the land of the philistims.
 and abraham planted a groue in beersheba and called there on the name of the lord the euerlasting god.
 and abraham was a strger in the philistims land a long season.
 and after these things god did proue abraham and said vnto him abraham.
 who answered here am i.
 and he said take now thine onely sonne izhak whome thou louest and get thee vnto the lande of moriah and offre him therefor a burnt offring vpon one of the mountaines which i wil shewe thee.
 then abraham rose vp early in the morning and sadled his asse and toke two of his seruants with him and izhak his sonne and cloue wood for the burnt offring and rose vp and went to the place which god had tolde him.
 then the third day abraham lift vp his eies and sawe place a farre of and vnto his abide you here with the asse.
 for i and the childe wil go yonder and worship come againe vnto you.
 then abraham toke the wood of the burnt offring and laied it vpon izhak his sonne he toke the fire in his hand and the knife.
 and they went bothe together.
 then spake izhak vnto abraham his father and said my father.
 and he answered here am i my sonne.
 and he said beholde the fire and the wood but where is the lambe for the burnt offring.
 then abraham answered my sonne god wil prouide him a lambe for a burnt offring.
 so they went bothe together.
 when they came to the place which god had shewed him abraham buylded an altar there and couched the wood and bound izhak his sonne and laied him on the altar vpon the wood.
 and abraham stretching forthe his hand toke the knife to kil his sonne.
 but the angel of the lord called vnto him from heauen saying abraham abraham.
 and he answered here am i.
 then he said lay not thine hand vpon the childe nether do anie thing vnto him.
 for now i knowe that thou fearest god seing for my sake thou hast not spared thine onely sonne.
 and abraham lifting vp his eies loked.
 and beholde there was a ram behinde him caught by the hornes in a bushe then abraham went and toke the ram offred him vp for a burnt offring in the stede of his sonne.
 and abraham called the name of that place iehouahiireh as it is said this day in the mount wil the lord be sene.
 and the angel of the lord cryed vnto abraham from heauen the seconde time and said by my selfe haue i sworne saith the lord because thou hast done this thing and hast not spared thine onely sonne therefore wil i surely blesse thee and wil greatly multiplie thy sede as the starres of the heauen and as the sande which is vpon the seashore and thy sede shal possesse the gate of his ennemies.
 and in thy sede shal all the nacions of the earth be blessed because thou hast obeied my voyce.
 then turned abraham againe vnto his seruants and they rose vp and went together to beersheba.
 and abraham dwelt at beersheba.
 and after these things one tolde abraham saying beholde milch she hathe also borne children vnto thy brother nahr.
 to wit vz his eldest sonne buz his brother and kemuel father of aram and chesed and hazon and pildash and iidlaph and bethuel.
 and bethuel begate rebekah.
 these eight did milcah beare to nahr abrahams brother.
 and his concubine called reumah she bare also tebah and gahan and thahash maachah.
 when sarah was an hundreth twenty and seuen yere olde so long liued she.
 then sarah dyed in kiriatharba.
 the same is hebron in the land of canaan and abraham came to mourne for sarah and to wepe for her.
 then abraham rose vp from the sight of his corps and talked with the hitties saying i am a stranger and a foriner among you giue me a possession of buryal with you that i may bury my dead out of my sight.
 then the hittites aunswered abraham saying vnto him.
 heare vs my lord.
 thou art a prince of god amonge vs.
 in the chiefest of our sepulchres bury thy dead.
 none of vs shall forbid thee his sepulchre but thou mayest bury thy dead therein.
 then abraham stode vp and bowed hym selfe before the people of the lande of the hittites.
 and he communed with them saying if it be your mynde that i shall bury my dead out of my sight heare me and intreat for me to ephron the sonne of zohar.
 that he wolde giue me the caue of machpelah which he hathe in the end of his field.
 that he wolde giue it me for as muche money as it is worthe for a possession to bury in among you.
 for ephron dwelt among the hittites then ephron the hittite aunswered abraham in the audience of all the hittites that went in at the gates of his citie saying.
 no my lord heare me.
 the field giue i thee and the caue that therein is i giue it thee.
 euen in the presence of the sonnes of my people giue i it thee to bury thy dead.
 then abraham bowed hym selfe before the people of the land.
 and spake vnto ephron in the audience of the people of the countrey saying seyng thou wilt giue it i praye thee heare me i will giue the price of the field.
 receyue it of me and i wil bury my dead there.
 ephron then aunswered abraham saying vnto him.
 my lorde hearken vnto me.
 the lande is worthe foure hundreth shekels of siluer.
 what is that betwene me thee.
 bury therfore thy dead.
 so abraham hearkened vnto ephron and abraham weyed to ephron the siluer which he had named in the audience of the hittites euen foure hundreth siluer shekels of currant money among marchantes.
 so the field of ephron which was in machpelah and ouer agaynste mamre euen the field and the caue that was therein and all the trees that were in the field which were in all the borders round about was made sure.
 vnto abraham for a possession in the sight of the hittites euen of all that went in at the gates of his citie.
 and after thys abraham buryed sarah hys wyfe in the caue of the field of machpelah ouer agaynste mamre.
 the same is hebron in the land of canaan.
 thus bothe the field and the caue that is therein was made sure vnto abraham for a possession of buryal by the hittites.
 now abraham was olde and striken in yeres and the lord had blessed abraham in all things.
 therefore abraham said vnto hys eldest seruant of his house whiche had the rule ouer all that he had put nowe thine hande vnder my thygh.
 and i will make thee sweare by the lorde god of the heauen and god of the earth that thou shalte not take a wyfe vnto my sonne of the daughters of the cananites among whome i dwel.
 but thou shalte go vnto my countrie and to my kynred and take a wife vnto my sonne izhak.
 and the seruant sayd to hym what if the woman wyll not come with me to this land.
 shal i bring thy sonne againe vnto the land from whence thou camest.
 to whome abraham answered beware that thou bring not my sonne thether againe.
 the lorde god of heauen who toke me from my fathers house and frome the lande where i was borne and that spake vnto me and that sweare vnto me saying vnto thy sede wyl i giue this land he shal send his angell before thee and thou shalt take a wyfe vnto my sonne from thence.
 neuertheles if the woman will not followe thee then shalt thou be discharged of this mine othe.
 onely bring not my sonne thether agayne.
 then the seruaunt put hys hande vnder the thygh of abraham hys master and sware to him for this matter.
 so the seruaunt toke ten camels of the camels of hys master and departed.
 for he had all his masters goods in his hande and so he arose and went to aram naharaim vnto the citie of nahor.
 and he made his camels to lie downe without the citie by a well of water at euen aboute the tyme that women come out to drawe water.
 and he said o lord god of my master abraham i beseche thee send me good spede this day shewe mercie vnto my master abraham lo i stande by the well of water whiles the mens daughters of thys citie come oute to drawe water.
 graunt that the maide to whome i saye bowe downe thy pitcher i pray thee that i may drinke.
 if she say drinke and i wil giue thy camels drinke also.
 may be she that thou hast ordeined for thy seruant izhak.
 and ther by shall i knowe that thou hast shewed mercie on my master.
 nowe yet he had left speakyng beholde rebekah came out the daughter of bethuel sonne of milcah the wyfe of nahor abrahams brother and her pitcher vppon her shulder.
 and the maide was very faire to loke vppon a virgine and vnknowen of man and she went downe to the well and filled her pitcher and came vp.
 then the seruant ran to mete her and sayd let me drincke i praye thee a litle water of thy pitcher.
 and she said drinke syr.
 and she hasted and let downe her pitcher vpon her hand and gaue him drinke.
 and when the had giuen hym drinke she said i wil drawe water for thy camels also vntil they haue dronken ynough.
 and she poured out her pitcher into the trogh spedelye and ranne agayne vnto the well to drawe water and she drewe for all his camels.
 so the man wondred at her and helde hys peace to wit whether the lorde had made his iourney prosperous or not.
 and when the camels had left drinking the man toke a golden abillement of halfe a shekel weight and two bracelettes for her hands of ten shekels weight of golde.
 and he sayd whose daughter art thou.
 tell me i praye thee is there roume in thy fathers house for vs to lodge in.
 then she said to hym i am the daughter of bethuel the sonne of milcah whom she bare vnto nahr.
 moreouer she said vnto hym we haue lytter also and prouander ynough and roume to lodge in.
 and the man bowed him selfe and worshipped the lord.
 and sayd blessed be the lorde god of my master abrahm which hath not withdrawen his mercie and his trueth from my master.
 for when i was in the waye the lorde broght me to my masters brethrens house.
 and the maide ran and told them of her mothers house according to these wordes.
 now rebekah had a brother called laban and laban ran vnto the man to the wel.
 for when he had sene the earynges and the bracelettes in his sisters hands and when he heard the wordes of rebekah his sister saying thus sayd the man vnto me then he went to the man and lo he stode by the camels at the well.
 and he sayd come in thou blessed of the lorde wherfore standest thou without seing i haue prepared the house and roume for the camels.
 then the man came into the house and he vnsadeled the camels and broght litter and prouander for the camels and water to washe his fete the mens fete that were with him.
 afterward the meat was set before him.
 but he sayd i will not eat vntill i haue sayd my message.
 and he said speake on.
 then he said i am abrahams seruant.
 and the lord hath blessed my master wonderfully that he is become great.
 for he hath giuen him shepe and beues and siluer and golde and men seruantes and maide seruantes and camels and asses.
 and sarah my masters wife hathe borne a sonne to my master when she was olde and vnto him hathe he giuen all that he hathe.
 nowe my master made me sweare saying thou shalte not take a wife to my sonne of the daughters of the canaanites in whose land i dwel.
 but thou shalt go vnto my fathers house to my kynred take a wife vnto my sonne.
 then i said vnto my master what if the woman wil not followe me.
 who aunswered me the lorde before whom i walke wil send his angel with thee and prosper thy iourney and thou shalt take a wife for my sonne of my kindred and my fathers house.
 then shalt thou be discharged of mine othe when thou commest to my kinred.
 and if they giue thee not one thou shalte be fre from mine othe.
 so i came this daye to the well and sayd o lord the god of my master abraham if thou now prosper my iourney which i go.
 beholde i stand by the wel of water.
 when a virgine commeth forthe to drawe water and i saie to her giue me i praye thee a litle water of thy pitcher to drinke.
 and she saye to me drinke thou and i will also drawe for thy camels let herbe the wife whiche the lorde hathe prepared for my masters sonne.
 and before i had made an end of speaking in myne hearte beholde rebekah came forthe and her pitcher on her shuldre and she went downe vnto the well and drewe water.
 then i sayd vnto her giue me drinke i praye thee.
 and she made haste and toke downe her pitcher from her shulder and said drinke and i will giue thy camels drynke also.
 so i dranke and she gaue the camels drinke also.
 then i asked her and said whose daughter art thou.
 and she aunswered the daughter of bethuel nahors sonne whome milcah bare vnto hym.
 then i put the abillement vpon her face and the bracelettes vppon her handes.
 and i bowed downe and worshipped the lorde and blessed the lord god of my master abraham whiche had broght me the ryght waye to take my masters brothers daughter vnto his sonne.
 now therefore if ye will deale mercifully and truely with my master tel me.
 and if not tel me that i may turne me to the right hand or to the left.
 then answered laban bethuel said this thing is proceded of the lord.
 we can not therfore say vnto thee nether euil nor good.
 beholde rebekah is before thee take her go that she may be thy masters sonnes wife euen as the lord hathe said.
 and when abrahams seruaunt heard their wordes he bowed him selfe towarde the earth vnto the lord.
 then the seruant toke forth iewels of siluer and iewels of golde and raiment and gaue to rebekah.
 also vnto her brother to her mother he gaue giftes.
 afterwarde they did eat drinke bothe he and the men that were with him taried all night and when they rose vp in the morning he said let me departe vnto my master.
 then her brother and her mother answered let the maide abide with vs at the least ten dayes.
 then shal she go.
 but he said vnto them hindre you me not seing the lord hath prospered my iourney.
 send me away that i may go to my master.
 then they said we will call the maide and aske her consent.
 they called rebekah and said vnto her wilt thou go with this man.
 and she answered i wil go.
 so they let rebekh their sister go and her nourse with abrahams seruant and his men.
 and they blessed rebekah and said vnto her thou art our sister grow into thousand thousandes and thy sede possesse the gate of his enemies.
 then rebekh arose and her maides rode vpon the camels and followed the man and the seruant toke rebekah departed now izhak came from the way of beerlahairoi for he dwelt in the south countrey and izhak went out to pray in the field toward the euening.
 who lift vp his eies and loked and beholde the camels came.
 also rebekah lift vp her eyes and when she sawe izhak she lighted downe from the camel.
 for she had said to the seruant who is yonder man that commeth in the field to mete vs.
 and the seruant had said it is my master so she toke a vaile and couered her.
 and the seruant tolde izhak all thyngs that he had done.
 afterward izhak broght her into the tent of sarah his mother he toke rebekah she was his wife and he loued her.
 so izhak was comforted after his mothers death.
 now abraham had taken him another wife called .
 which bare him zimran and iokshan and medan and midean and ishbak shuah.
 and iokshan begate sheba and dedan and the sonnes of dedan were asshurim letushim and leummim.
 also the sonnes of midean were ephah epher hanoch abida and eldaah all these were the sonnes of keturah.
 and abraham gaue all his goods to izhak.
 but vnto the sonnes of the concubines whiche abraham had abraham gaue giftes and sent them away from izhak his sonne while he yet liued eastward to the east countrey.
 and this is the age of abrahams life whiche he liued an hundreth seuenty and fiue yere.
 then abraham yelded the spirit and dyed in a good age an olde man and of great yeres and was gathered to his people.
 and his sonnes izhak and ishmael buryed him in the caue of machpelah in the field of ephrn sonne of zohar the hittite before mamre.
 which field abraham boght of the hittites where abraham was buryed with sarah his wife.
 and after the death of abraha god blessed izhak his sonne and izhak dwelt by beerlahairoi.
 now these are the generacions of ishmael abrahams sonne whom hagar the egiptian sarahs hand maide bare vnto abraham.
 and these are the names of the sonnes of ishmael name by name accordyng to their kinreds.
 the eldest sonne of ishmael was nebaith then kedar and and mibsam.
 and mishma and dumah and mass.
 hadar and tema ietur naphish and kedemah.
 these are the sonnes of ishmael and these are their names by their townes and by their castels.
 to wit twelue princes of their nations.
 and these are the yeres of the life of ishmael an hundreth thirti and seuen yere and he yelded the spirit and dyed and was gathered vnto his people and they dwelt from hauilah vnto shur that is towardes egypt as thou goest to asshur ishmael dwelt in the presence of all his brethren.
 like wise these are the generacions of izhak abrahams sonne.
 abraham begate izhak.
 and izhak was fourty yere olde when he toke rebekah to wife the daughter of bethuel the aramite of padan aram and sister to laban the aramite.
 and izhak prayed vnto the lorde for hys wife because she was baren and the lord was intreated of him and rebekah his wife conceiued.
 but the children stroue together within her.
 therefore she said seing it is so why am i thus.
 wherfore she went to aske the lord and the lord said to her two nations are in thy wombe two maner of people shalbe deuided out of thy bowels and the one people shalbe mightier then the other and the elder shal serue the yonger.
 therefore when her time of deliuerance was fulfilled twines were in her wombe.
 so he that came out first was red and he was all ouer as a rough garment they called his name esau.
 and afterwarde came his brother out his hand held esau by the hele.
 therefore his name was called iaakb.
 now izhak was thre score yere olde when rebekah bare them.
 and the boyes grewe and esau was a cunning hunter and liued in the fields.
 but iaakb was a plaine man and dwelt in tentes and izhak loued esau for venison was his meat but rebekah loued iaakb.
 now iaakh sodde pottage and esau came from the field and was .
 then esau said to iaakb let me eat i pray thee of that pottage so red for i am weary.
 therfore was his name called edm.
 and iaakb said sel me euen now thy birthright.
 and esau said lo i am almost dead what is then this birthright to me.
 iaakb then said sweare to me euen now.
 and he sware to him and solde his birthright vnto iaakb.
 then iaakb gaue esau bread and pottage of lentiles.
 and he did eat and drinke and rose vp and went his way.
 so esau contemned his birthright.
 and there was a famine in the land besides the first famine that was in the dayes of abraham wherefore izhak went to king of the philistims vnto .
 for the lord appeared vnto him and said go not downe into egypt but abide in the land which i shal shewe vnto thee.
 dwel in this land and i wil be with thee and wil blesse thee.
 for to thee and to thy sede i wil giue all these countreis.
 and i will performe the othe whiche i vnto abraham thy father.
 also i wil cause thy to multiplie as the starres of heauen and wil giue vnto thy sede al these countreis.
 and in thy sede shal al the nacions of the earth be blessed.
 because that abraham obeied my voyce and kept mine ordinance my commandementes my statutes and my lawes.
 so izhak dwelt in gerar.
 and the men of the place asked him of his wife and he said she is my sister.
 for he feared to say she is my wife lest said he the men of the place shulde kill me because of rebekah.
 for she was beautiful to the eie.
 so after he had bene there long time abimelech king of the philistims loked out at a windowe and lo he sawe izhak sportyng with rebekah his wife.
 then abimelech called izhak and said lo she is of a suretie thy wife and why saidest thou she is my sister.
 to whome izhak answered because i thoght this it maie be that i shal die for her.
 then abimelech said why hast thou done this vnto vs.
 one of the people had almost lien by thy wife so shuldest thou haue broght sinne vpon vs.
 then abimelech charged all his people saying he that toucheth this man or his wife shal die the death.
 afterward izhak sowed in that land founde in the same yere an hundreth folde by estimacion.
 and so the lord blessed him.
 and the man waxed mightie stil increased til he was exceading great.
 for he had flockes of shepe and herdes of cattel and a mightie housholde.
 therefore the philistims had enuie at him.
 in so muche that the philistims stopped filled vp with earth all the wells whiche his fathers seruants digged in his father abrahams time.
 then abimelech said vnto izhak get thee from vs for thou art mightier then we a great deale.
 therefore izhak departed thence pitched his tent in the valley of gerar and dwelt there.
 and izhak returning digged the welles of water whiche they had digged in the dayes of abraham his father.
 for the philistims had stopped them after the death of abraham and he gaue them the same names whiche his father gaue them.
 izhaks seruants then digged in the valley and found there a well of liuing water.
 but the herd men of gerar did striue with izhaks herd men saying the water is ours.
 therefore called he the name of the well esek because they were a strief with hym.
 afterward they digged another well and stroue for that also and he called the name of it sitnah.
 then he remoued thence and digged another well for the whiche they stroue not.
 therfore called he the name of it rehobth and said because the lord hathe now made vs roume we shal encrease vpon the earth.
 so he went vp thence to beersheba.
 and the lord appeared vnto hym the same night and said i am the god of abraham thy father.
 feare not for i am with thee and will blesse thee and multiplie thy sede for my seruant abrahams sake.
 then he buylt an altar there and called vpon the name of the lord and there spred his tent.
 where also izhaks seruants digged a well.
 then came abimelech to him from gerar and ahuzzath one of his friends and phicl the captaine of his armie.
 to whome izhak sayd wherefore come ye to me seyng ye hate me and haue put me awaye from you.
 who answered we sawe certeinly that the lorde was with thee and we thoght thus let there be nowe an othe betwene vs euen betwene vs thee and let vs make a couenant with thee.
 thou shalte do vs no hurte as we haue not touched thee and as we haue done vnto thee nothyng but good and sent thee awaie in peace.
 thou now the blessed of the lord do this.
 then he made them a feaste and they did eat and drinke.
 and they rose vp betymes in the mornyng and sware one to another.
 then izhak let them go and they departed from hym in peace.
 and that same daye izhaks seruantes came and tolde him of a wel which they had digged said vnto him we haue found water.
 so he called it shibah.
 therefore the name of the citie is called beersheba vnto thys daye.
 nowe when esau was fourtie yere olde he toke to wyfe iudith the daughter of beeri an hittite and bashemath the daughter of elon an hittite also.
 and they were a grief of minde to izhak and to rebekah.
 and when izhak was olde and hys eyes were dimme so that he colde not se he called esau hys eldest sonne and sayd vnto him my sonne.
 and he aunswered hym i am here.
 then he sayd beholde i am nowe olde and knowe not the day of my death.
 wherefore nowe i praie thee take thine instruments thy quiuer and thy bowe and get thee to the field that thou mayest take me some venison.
 then make me sauourie meat such as i loue and bring it me that i may eat and that my soule maie blesse thee before i dye.
 now rebekah heard when izhak spake to esau his sonne and esau went into the fielde to hunt for venison and to bring it then rebekah spake vnto iaakob her sonne saying beholde i haue heard thy father talking with esau thy brother saying.
 bryng me venison and make me sauourie meat that i maye eat and blesse thee before the lord afore my death.
 nowe therefore my sonne heare my voyce in that which i commande thee.
 get thee now to the flocke and bryng me thence two good kyds of the goates that i may make pleasant meat of them for thy father such as he loueth.
 then thou shalte bring it to thy father and he shall eat to the intent that he maie blesse thee before his death.
 but iaakob sayd to rebekah hys mother beholde esau my brother is rough and i am smothe.
 my father maie possibly fele me and i shall seme to him to be a mocker.
 so shal i bring a curse vpon me and not a blessing.
 but hys mother sayd vnto him vpon me be thy curse my sonne.
 onely heare my voyce and go and bring me them.
 so he went and fet them and broght them to his mother.
 and his mother made pleasant meat such as his father loued.
 and rebekah toke faire clothes of her elder sonne esau which were in her house and clothed iaakob her yonger sonne.
 and she couered hys hands and the smothe of his necke with the skinnes of the kyds of the goates.
 afterwarde she put the pleasaunt meat and bread which she had prepared in the hand of her sonne iaakob.
 and when he came to his father he sayd my father.
 who answered i am here.
 who art thou my sonne.
 and iaakob sayd to hys father i am esau thy first borne i haue done as thou badest me arise i praie thee.
 sit vp and eat of my venison that thy soule maie blesse me.
 then izhak said vnto his sonne howe hast thou founde it so quickly my sonne.
 who said because the lorde thy god broght it to mine hand.
 againe said izhak vnto iaakob come nere nowe that i may fele thee my sonne whether thou be that my sonne esau or not.
 then iaakob came nere to izhak hys father and he felt hym and sayd the voyce is iaakobs voyce but the handes are the of esau.
 for he knewe him not because his handes were rough as hys brother esaus handes.
 wherefore he blessed him againe he said art thou that my sonne esau.
 who answered yea.
 then said he bryng it me hether and i will eat of my sonnes venison that my soule may blesse thee.
 and he broght it to him he ate.
 also he broght him wine and he dranke.
 afterwarde his father izhak said vnto him come nere now and kisse me my sonne.
 and he came nere and kyssed hym.
 then he smelled the sauour of hys garments and blessed hym and sayd beholde the smell of my sonne is as the smell of a field which the lord hathe blessed.
 god giue thee therefore of the dewe of heauen and the fatnes of the earth and plentie of wheat and wine.
 let people be thy seruauntes and nacions bowe vnto thee.
 be lord ouer thy brethren and let thy mothers children honour thee cursed be he that curseth thee and blessed be he that blesseth thee.
 and when izhak had made an ende of blessynge iaakob and iaakob was scace gone out frome the presence of izhak hys father then came esau his brother from hys hunting.
 and he also prepared sauourie meate and broght it to his father and said vnto his father let my father arise and eat of his sonnes venison that thy soule may blesse me.
 but his father izhak said vnto him who art thou.
 and he answered i am thy sonne euen thy first borne esau.
 then izhak was stricken wyth a meruelous great feare and said who and where is he that hunted venison and broght it me and i haue eat of all before thou camest.
 and i haue blessed hym he shall be blessed.
 when esau heard the wordes of his father he cried out with a great crye and bitter out of measure and sayd vnto hys father blesse me euen me also my father.
 who answered thy brother came with subtiltie and hathe taken away thy blessing.
 then he sayd was he not iustely called iaakob.
 for he hathe deceiued me two tymes.
 he toke my birthright and lo nowe hath he taken my blessing.
 also he said hast thou not reserued a blessing for me.
 then izhak aunswered and sayd vnto esau beholde i haue made hym thy lord and all hys brethren haue i made hys seruantes.
 also with wheat and wyne haue i furnished hym and vnto thee nowe what shall i do my sonne.
 then esau said vnto hys father hast thou but one blessing my father.
 blesse me euen me also my father.
 and esau listed vp hys voyce and wept.
 then izhak father answered and sayd vnto hym beholde the fatnes of the earth shalbe thy dwelynge place and thou shalte haue of the dewe of heauen from aboue.
 and by thy sworde shalt thou liue and shalt be thy brothers seruant.
 but it shall come to when thou shalt get the mastrie that thou shalt breake his yoke from thy necke.
 therefore esau hated iaakb because of the blessyng wherewith his father blessed him.
 and thoght in his minde the dayes of mourning for my father wil come shortly then wil slay my brother iaakob.
 and it was tolde to rebekah of the words of esau her elder sonne and she sent and called iaakob her yonger sonne and sayd vnto him beholde thy brother esau is comforted against thee meaning to kil thee.
 now therefore my sonne heare my voyce.
 arise and flee thou to haran to my brother laban.
 and tary with him a while vntil thy brothers fearcenes beswaged.
 and till thy brothers wrath turne away from thee and he forget the things whiche thou hast done to then will i send and take thee frome .
 why shulde i be depriued of you bothe in one day.
 also sayd to izhak i am weary of my lyfe for the daughters of heth.
 if iaakb a wife of the daughters of heth lyke these of the daughters of the lande what auaileth it me to liue.
 then izhak called iaakob and blessed hym and charged hym.
 and sayd vnto hym take not a wyfe of the daughters of canaan.
 arise get thee to padan aram to the house or thy mothers father and thence take thee a of the daughters of thy mothers brother.
 and god al blesse thee and make thee to encrease and multiplie thee that thou maiest be a multitude of people.
 and gyue thee the blessynge of abraham euen to thee and to thy sede wyth thee that thou maiest inherite the land wherein thou a stranger whiche god gaue vnto abraham.
 thus izhak sent forthe iaakb and he went to padan aram vnto laban sonne of bethuel the aramite brother to rebekah iaakobs and eiaus mothers.
 when esau sawe that izhak had blessed and sent him to padan aram to fet hym a wife thence and giuen hym a charge when he blessed him saying thou shalt not take a wife of the daughters of canaan.
 and that iaakb had obeied his father and his mother and was gone to padan aram.
 also esau seyng that the daughters of canaan displeased izhak his father.
 then went esau to ishmael and toke vnto the wiues whiche he had mahalath the daughter of ishmael abrahams sonne the sister of nabaioth to be his wife.
 now iaakob departed from beersheba and went to haran.
 and he came vnto a certeine place and taried there all nyght because the sonne was downe and toke of the stones of the place and layed vnder hys heade and slepte in the same place.
 then he dreamed and beholde there stode a ladder vppon the earth and the top of it reached vp to heauen.
 and lo the aungels of god went vp and downe by it.
 and beholde the lorde stode aboue it and sayd i am the lorde god of abraham thy father and the god of izhak.
 the land vpon thee whiche thou slepest will giue thee and thy sede.
 and thy sede shal be as the dust of the earth and thou shalt spreade abrode to the west and to the east and to the north and to the south and in thee and in thy sede shall al the families of the earth be blessed.
 and lo i am with thee and will kepe thee whither soeuer thou goest and wil bring thee againe into this land.
 for i will not forsake thee vntil i haue performed that that i haue promised thee.
 then iaakb awoke out of his slepe and said surely the lord is in this place and i was not aware.
 and he was afraid and said how fearefull is this place.
 this is none other but the house of god and this is the gate of heauen.
 then iaakb rose vp early in the mornyng and toke the stone that he had laied vnder his head and set it vp as a piller powred oyle vpon the top of it and he called the name of that place bethel.
 notwithstanding the name of the citie was at the first called luz.
 then iaakob vowed a vowe saying.
 if god wil be with me and wil kepe me in this iourney which i go and will giue me bread to eat and clothes to put on.
 so that i come again vnto my fathers house in safety then shal the lord be my god.
 and this stone with i haue set vp as a piller shalbe gods house.
 and of all that thou shalt giue me wil i giue the tenth vnto thee.
 then iaakb lift vp his fete and came into the east countrey.
 and as he loked about beholde there was a wel in the field and lo thre flockes of shep lay therby for at that wel were the flockes watered and there was a greate stone vpon the welles mouthe.
 and thither were all the flockes gathered and they rolled the stone from the welles mouthe and watered the shepe and put the stone againe vpon the welles mouthe in his place.
 and iaakb said vnto them my brethren whence be ye.
 and they aunswered we are of haran.
 then he said vnto them knowe ye laban the sonne of nahor.
 who said we knowe him.
 againe he said vnto them is he in good helth.
 and they answered he is in good helth and beholde his daughter rahell commeth with the shepe.
 then he said lo it is yet hie day nether is it time that the cattel shuld be gathered together.
 watter ye the shepe go fede them.
 but they said we may not vntill all the flockes be broght together and til that men rolle the stone from the welles mouthe that we may water the shepe.
 while he talked with them rahel also came with her fathers shepe for she kept them.
 and assone as iaakb sawe rahel the daughter of laban his mothers brother and the shepe of laban his mothers brother then came iaakob nere and rolled the stone from the welles mouth and watered the flocke of laban his mothers brother.
 and iaakb kissed rahel and lift vp his voyce and wept.
 for iaakb rahel that he was her fathers brother and that he was rebekahs sonne then she ran and tolde her father.
 and when laban heard tel of iaakb his sisters sonne he ran to mete him and embrased him and kissed him and broght him to his house.
 and he tolde laban all these things.
 to whome laban said wel thou art my bone and my flesh and he abode with him the space of a moneth.
 for laban said vnto iaakob thogh thou be my brother shuldest thou therefore serue me for noght.
 tel me what shalbe thy wages.
 now laban had two daughters the elder called leah and the yonger called rahel.
 and leah was tender eyed but rahel was beautiful and faire.
 and iaakb loued rahel and said i wil serue thee seuen yeres for rahel thy yonger daughter.
 the laban answered it is better that i giue her thee then that i shulde giue here to another man.
 abide with me.
 and iaakob serued seuen yeres for rahel and they semed vnto him but a fewe daies because he loued her.
 then iaakb said to laban giue me my wife that i maie go into her.
 for my terme is ended.
 wherefore laban gathered together all the men of the place and made a feast.
 but when the euening was come he toke leah his daughter and broght her to him he went in vnto her.
 and laban gaue his maide zilpah to his daughter leah to be her seruant.
 but when the morning was come beholde it was leah.
 then said he to laban wherefore hast thou done thus to me.
 did not i serue thee for rahel.
 wherefore then hast thou beguiled me.
 and laban answered it is not the maner of this place to giue the yonger before the elder.
 fulfil seuen yeres for her and we wil also giue thee this for the seruice which thou shalt serue me yet seuen yeres more.
 then iaakb did so and fulfilled her seuen yeres so he gaue him rahel his daughter to be his wife.
 laban also gaue to rahel his daughter bilhah his maide to be her seruant.
 so entred he into rahel also and loued also rahel more then leah and serued hym yet seuen yeres mo.
 when the lord sawe that leah was despised he made her frutefull.
 but rahell was baren.
 and leah conceiued and bare a sonne and she called his name reuben.
 for she said because the lord hathe loked vpon my tribulacion now therefore mine housband wil loue me.
 and she conceiued againe and bare a sonne and said because the lord heard that i was hated he hath therfore giuen me this sonne also and she called his name simeon.
 and she conceiued againe and bare a sonne and said now at this time wil my housband kepe me companie because i haue borne him thre sonnes.
 therefore was his name called leui.
 moreouer she conceiued againe and bare a sonne saying now wil praise the lord.
 therefore she called his name iudah and left bearing.
 and when rahel sawe that she bare iaakb no rahl enuied her sister and said vnto iaakob giue me children or els i dye.
 then iaakobs angre was kindeled against and he said am i in gods stede whiche hath with holden from thee the frute of the wombe.
 and she said beholde my maide bilhah go into her and she shal beare vpon my knees and i shall haue children also by her.
 then she gaue him bilhah her maide to wife and iaakob went into her.
 so bilhah conceiued bare iaakb a sonne then said rahel god hathe giuen sentence on my side and hathe also heard my voyce and hathe giuen me a sonne.
 therfore called she is name.
 dan.
 and bilhah rahels maide conceiued againe and bare iaakb the seconde sonne.
 then rahel said with excellent wrestlings haue i wrestled with my sister haue gotten the vpper hand.
 and she called hys name .
 and when leah sawe that she had left bearing she toke zilpah her maide and gaue her iaakob to wife.
 and zilpah leahs maide bare iaakb a sonne.
 then said leah a companie cometh.
 and she called his name gad.
 againe zilpah leahs maide bare iaakob another sonne.
 then said leah ah blessed am i for the daughters wil blesse me and she called his name asher.
 now reuben went in the dayes of the wheat haruest and found mandrakes in the field and broght them vnto his mother leah then said rahel to leah giue me i pray thee of thy sonnes mandrakes.
 but she answered her is it a smale matter for thee to take mine housband except thou take my sonnes mandrakes also.
 then said rahel therefore he shal slepe with thee this night for thy sonnes mandrakes.
 and iaakob came from the field in the euening and leah went out to mete him and said come into me for i haue boght and payed for thee with my sonnes mandrakes.
 and he slept with her that night.
 and god heard leah and she conceiued and bare vnto iaakb the fift sonne.
 then said leah god hathe giuen me my rewarde because i gaue my maide to my housband and she called his name issachar.
 after leah conceiued againe and bare iaakb the sixt sonne.
 then leah said god hathe endued me with a good dowrie.
 now wil mine housband dwel with me because i haue borne him six sonnes.
 and she called his name zebulun.
 after that she bare a daughter and she called her name dinah.
 and god remembred rahel and god heard her and opened her wombe.
 so she conceiued and bare a sonne and said god hathe taken away my rebuke.
 and she called his name ioseph saying the lord wil giue me yet another sonne.
 and assone as rahel had borne ioseph iaakb said to laban send me away that i may go vnto my place and to my countrey.
 giue me my wiues and my children for whome i haue serued thee and let me go.
 for thou knowest what seruice i haue done thee to whome laban answered if i haue now founde fauour in thy sight tarie.
 i haue perceiued that the lord hathe blessed me for thy sake.
 also he said appoint vnto me thy wages and i wil giue it thee.
 but he said vnto him thou knowest what seruice i haue done thee and in what taking thy cattel hathe bene vnder me.
 for the litle that thou haddest before i came is increased into a multitude.
 the lord hathe blessed thee by my comming.
 but now when shal i trauel for mine owne house also.
 then he said what shalt giue thee.
 and iaakb answered thou shalt giue me nothing at all.
 if thou wilt do this thing for me i wil returne fede and kepe thy shepe.
 i wil passe through all thy flockes this day and separat from them all the shepe with litle spottes and great spottes and all blacke lambes among the shepe and the great spotted and litle spotted among the goates and it shalbe my wages.
 so shal my righteousnes answere for me hereafter when it shal come for my rewarde before thy face and euerie one that hathe not litle or great spottes among the goates and blacke among the shepe the same shalbe theft with me.
 then laban said go to wolde god it might be according to thy saying.
 therefore he toke out the same day the he goates that were party coloured and with great spottes and all the she goates with litle and great spottes and all that had white in them and all the blacke among the shepe and put them in the keping of his sonnes.
 and he set thre daies iourney betwene him selfe and iaakob and iakob kept the rest of labans shepe.
 then iaakb toke roddes of popular and of hasel and of the chesnut tre pilled white strakes in them and made the white appeare in the roddes.
 then he put the roddes which he had pilled in the gutters and watering troghes when the shepe came to drinke before the shepe.
 for thei were in heate when thei came to drinke and the shepe were in heate before the roddes and afterward broght forthe yong of party colour and with smale and great spottes.
 and iaakb parted these lombes and turned the faces of the flocke towards these lambes party coloured all maner of blacke among the shepe of laban.
 so he put his owne flockes by them selues and put them not with labans flocke.
 and in euerie ramming tyme of the stronger shepe iaakb laied the roddes before the eies of the shepe in the gutters that thei might conceiue before the roddes.
 but when the shepe were feble he put them not in.
 and so the febler were labans and the stronger iakobs.
 so the man encreased excedingly and had manie flockes and maide seruants and men seruants and camels and asses.
 now he heard the wordes of labans sonnes saying iaakb hathe taken away all that was our fathers of our fathers goods hathe gotten all this honour.
 also iaakob behelde the countenance of laban that it was not towards him as in times past.
 and the lord had said vnto iaakob turne againe into the land of thy fathers and to thy kinred and i wil be with thee.
 therefore iaakb sent and called rahel leah to the field vnto his flocke.
 then said he vnto them i se your fathers countenance that it is not towarde me as it was wonte and the god of my father hathe bene with me.
 and ye knowe that i haue serued your father with all my might.
 but your father hathe deceiued me changed my wages ten times.
 but god suffred him not to hurt me.
 if he thus said the spotted shalbe thy wages then all the shepe bare spotted.
 and if he said thus the partie coloured shal be thy reward then bare all the shepe particoloured.
 thus hathe god take en awaie your fathers substance and giuen it me for in ramming time lifted vp mine eies and sawe in a dreame and beholde the he goates leaped vpon the she goates that were partie coloured with litle and great spottes spotted.
 and the angel of god said to me in a dreame iaakb.
 and i answered lo i am here.
 and he said lift vp now thine eies and se all the he goates leaping vpon the she goates that are partie coloured spotted with litle and great spottes.
 for i haue sene all that labn doeth vnto thee.
 i am the god of bethel where thou anointedst the piller where thou vowedst a vowe vnto me now arise get thee out of this countrei and returne vnto the land where thou wast borne.
 then answered rahel and leah and said vnto him haue we anie more porcion and enheritance in our fathers house.
 doeth not he count vs as strangers.
 for he hathe solde vs and hathe eaten vp and consumed our monie.
 therefore all the riches which god hathe taken from our father is ours and our childrens.
 now then whatsoeuer god hathe said vnto thee do it.
 then iaakob rose vp and set his sonnes and his wiues vpon camels.
 and he caried awaie all his flockes and all his substance which he had gotten to wit his riches which he had gotten in padan aram for to go to izhak his father vnto the land of canaan.
 when laban was gone to shere his shepe then rahel stale her fathers idoles.
 thus iaakb stale awaie the heart of laban the aramite.
 for he tolde him not that he fled.
 so fled he with all that he had and he rose vp and passed the riuer and set his face toward mount gilead.
 the third day after was it tolde laban that iaakob fled.
 then he toke his brethren with him and followed after him seuen dayes iourney and ouertoke him at mount gilead.
 and god came to laban the aramite in a dreame by night and said vnto take hede that thou speake not to iaakb ought saue good.
 then laban ouertoke iaakb and iaakob had pitched his tent in the mount.
 and laban also with his brethren pitched vpon mount gilead.
 then laban said to iaakb what hast thou done.
 thou hast euen stollen away mine heart and caried away my daughters as thogh they had bene taken captiues with the sworde.
 wherefore diddest thou flee so secretly and steale away from me and diddest not tel me that i might haue sent thee forthe with mirth and with songs with timbrel and with harpe.
 but thou hast not suffred me to kisse my sonnes and my daughters.
 now thou hast done foolishly in doing so.
 i am able to do you euil.
 but the god of your father spake vnto me yester night saying take hede that thou speake not to iaakob ought saue good.
 now thogh thou wentest thy way because thou greatly longedst after thy fathers house.
 yet wherefore hast thou stollen my gods.
 then iaakob answered and said to laban because i was afraid and thoght that thou woldest haue taken thy daughters from me.
 but with whome thou findest thy gods let him not liue.
 serche thou before our brethren what i haue of thine and take it to thee but iaakob wist not that rahel had stollen them then came laban into iaakobs tent and into leahs tent and into the two maides tentes but founde them not so he went out of leahs tent and entred into rahels tent.
 now rahel had taken the idoles and put them in the camels litter and sate downe vpon them and labn serched all the tent but founde them not.
 then said she to her father my lord be not angry that i can not rise vp before thee.
 for the custome of women is vpon me.
 so he serched but found not the idoles.
 then iaakb was wroth and chode with laban.
 iaakob also answered and said to laban what haue i trespaced.
 what haue i offended that thou hast pursued after me.
 seing thou hast serched all my stuffe what hast thou founde of all thine housholde stuffe.
 put it here before my brethren and thy brethren that they may iudge betwene vs bothe.
 this twenty yere i haue bene with thee.
 thine ewes and thy goates haue not cast their yong and the rams of thy flocke haue i not eaten.
 whatsoeuerwas torne of beastes i broght it not vnto thee but made it good my selfe.
 of mine hade diddest thou require it were it stollen by day or stollen by night.
 i was in the day consumed with heat and with frost in the night and my slepe departed from mine eies.
 thus haue i bene twenty yere in thine house and serued thee fourtenth yeres for thy two daughters and six yeres for thy shepe and thou hast changed my wages ten times.
 except the god of my father the god of abraham and the feare of izhak had bene with me surely thou haddest sent me away now empty.
 but god behelde my tribulacion and the labour of mine handes and rebuked thee yester night.
 then laban answered said vnto iaakob these daughters are my daughters and these sonnes are my sonnes and these shepe are my shepe and all that thou seest is mine and what can i do this day vnto these my daughters or to their sonnes which they haue borne.
 now therefore come and let vs make a couenant i and thou which may be a witnes betwene me and thee.
 then toke iaakob a stone and set it vp as a piller.
 and iaakb said vnto his brethren gather stones.
 who broghtstones made an heape and they did eat there vpon the heape.
 and laban called it iegarsahadutha and iaakob called it galeed.
 for laban said this heape is witnes betwene me thee this day.
 therefore he called the name of it galeed.
 also he called it mizph because he said the lord loke betwene me and thee when we shalbe departed one from another if thou shalt vexe my daughters or shalt take wiues beside my daughters.
 there is no man with vs beholde god is witnes betwene me and thee.
 moreouer laban said to iaakob beholde this heape and beholde the piller which i haue set betwene me and thee this heape shalbe witnes and the piller shalbe witnes that i wil not come ouer this heape to thee and that thou shalt not passe ouer this heape this piller vnto me for euil.
 the god of abraham and the god of nahor and the god of their father be iudge betwene vs.
 but iaakob sware by the feare of his father izhak.
 then iaakob did offre a sacrifice vpon the mount and called his brethren to eat bread and they did eat bread and taried all night in the mount.
 and early in the morning laban rose vp and kissed his sonnes and his daughters and blessed them and laban departing went vnto his place againe.
 now iaakob went forthe on his iourney and the angels of god met him.
 and when iaakob sawe them he said this is gods host and called the name of the same place mahanaim.
 then iaakob sent messengers before hym to esau his brother vnto the land of seirinto the countrey of edom.
 to whome he gaue commandement saying thus shal ye speake to my lord esau.
 thy seruant iaakob saith thus i haue bene a stranger with laban and taried vnto this time.
 i haue beues also and asses shepe and men seruantes and women seruantes and haue sent to shewe my lord that i may finde grace in thy sight.
 so the messengers came againe to iaakob saying we came vnto thy brother esau and he also commeth against thee foure hundreth men with him.
 then iaakob was greately afraid and was sore troubled and deuided the people that was with him and the shepe and the beues and the camels into two companies.
 for he said if esau come to the one companie and smite it the other companie shall escape.
 moreouer iaakob said o god of my father abraham and god of my father izhak.
 lord whiche saidest vnto me returne vnto thy countrey and to thy kinred and i wil do thee good.
 i am not worthie of the least of al the mercies and all the trueth which thou hast shewed vnto thy seruant.
 for with my stafe came i ouer this iorden and now haue i gotten two bandes.
 i pray thee deliuer me frome the hand of my brother from the hand of esau.
 for i feare him lest he wil come and smite me and the mother vpon the children.
 for thou saidest i wil surely do thee good and make thy sede as the sand of the sea whiche can not be nombred for multitude.
 and he taryed there the same night and toke of that whiche came to hand a presente for esau his brother.
 two hundreth she goates and twenty he goates two hundreth ewes twentie rammes.
 thirthy milche camels with their coltes fourtie kine and ten bullockes twentie she asses and ten foles.
 so he deliuered them into the hand of his seruantes euerie droue by them selues and said vnto his seruants passe before me and put a space betwene droue and droue.
 and he commanded the formest saying if esau my brother mete thee and aske thee saying whose seruant art thou.
 whither goest thou.
 whose are these before thee.
 then thou shalt say they be thy seruant iaakobs.
 it is a present sent vnto my lorde esau.
 and beholde he hym selfe also is behinde vs.
 so like wise commanded he the seconde the third and all that followed the droues saying after this maner ye shall speake vnto esau when ye finde him.
 and ye shal say moreouer beholde thy seruant iaakb commeth after vs for he thoght i will appease his wrath with the presente that goeth before me and afterwarde i wil se his face.
 it may be that he wil accept me so went the present before him.
 but he taried that night with the companie.
 and he rose vp the same night and toke his two wiues and his two maides and his eleuen children and went ouer the forde iabbok.
 and he toke them and sent them ouer the riuer and sent ouer that he had.
 when iaakob was left.
 him self alone there wrestled a man with him vnto the breaking of the day.
 and he sawe that he colde not preuaile against him.
 therefore he touched the holow of his thigh and the holow of iaakobs thigh was losed as he wrestled with him.
 and he said let me go for the morning appeareth who answered i wil not let thee go except thou blesse me.
 then said he vnto him what is thy name.
 and he said iaakob.
 then said he thy name shal be called iaakob no more but israel.
 because thou hast had power with god thou shalt also preuaile with men.
 then iaakob demanded saying tel me i pray thee thy name.
 and he said wherefore now doest thou aske my name.
 and he blessed him there.
 and iaakob called the name of the place peniel.
 for said he i haue sene god face to face and my life is preserued.
 and the sunne rose to him as he passed penielrand he halted vpon his thigh.
 therefore the children of israel eat not of the sinew that shranke in the holow of the thigh vnto this day.
 because he touched the sinew that shrank e in the holow of iaakobs thigh.
 and as iaakob lift vp his eies and loked beholde esau came with him foure hundreth men.
 and he deuided the children to leah and to rahl and to the two maides.
 and he put the maides and their children formost and leah and her children after and rahel and iosph hindermost.
 so he went before them bowed him selfe to the grounde seuen times vntil he came nere to his brother.
 then esau ran to mete him and embraced him and fel on his necke and kissed him thei wept.
 and he lift vp his eies and sawe the women and the children said who are these with thee.
 and he answered thei are the children whome god of his grace hathe giuen thy seruant.
 then came the maides nere thei and their children and bowed them selues.
 leah also with her children came nere and made obeissance.
 and after ioseph rahel drewe nere and did reuerence.
 then he said what meanest thou by al this droue which i met.
 who answered i haue sent it that it maie finde fauour in the sight of my lord.
 and esau said i haue ynough my brother.
 kepe that thou hast to thy selfe.
 but iaakob answered nay i pray thee.
 if i haue founde grace now in thy sight then receiue my present at mine hand.
 for i haue sene thy face as thogh i had sene the face of god because thou hast accepted me.
 i praye thee take my blessing that is broght thee.
 for god hathe had mercie on me and therefore i haue all thyngs.
 so he compelled him and he toke it.
 and he said let vs take our iourney go and i wil go before thee.
 then he answered him my lord knoweth that the children are tendre and the ewes and kine with yong vnder mine hand.
 and if they shulde ouer driue them one day all the flocke wolde dye.
 let now my lord go before his seruant i wil driue softly accordyng to the passe of the cattell whiche is before me and as the children be able to endure vntil i come to my lord vnto seir.
 then esau said i wil leaue then some of my folke with thee.
 and he answered what ne this.
 let me finde grace in the sight of my lord.
 so esau returned and went his way that same day vnto seir.
 and iaakb went forwarde towarde succth buylt him an house made booths for his .
 therefore he called the name of the place succoth.
 afterwarde iaakb came safe to shechem a citie which is in the land of canaan when he came from padan aram and pitched before the citie.
 and there he boght a parcel of grounde where he pitched his tent at the hand of the sonnes of hamr shechems father for an hundreth pieces of money.
 and he set vp there an altar and called it the mightie god of israel.
 then dinah the daughter of leah whiche she bare vnto iaakob went out to se the daughters of that countrey.
 whome when shechem the sonne of hamr the hiuite lord of that countrye sawe he toke her and lay with her and defiled her.
 so his heart claue vnto dinah the daughter of iaakb.
 and he loued the maide and spake kindely vnto the maide.
 then said shechem to his father hamor saying get me this maide to wife.
 now iaakb heard that he had defiled dinah his daughter and his sonnes were with his cattel in the field.
 therefore iaakob helde his peace vntil they were come then hamr the father of shechem went out vnto iaakb to commune with him.
 and when the sonnes of iaakob were come out of the field and heard it it grieued the men and they were very angrie because he had wroght vilennie in israel in that he had lien with iaakobs daughter.
 whiche thing ought not to be done.
 and hamor communed with them saying the soule of my sonne shechem longeth for your daughter.
 giue her him to wife i pray you.
 so make affinitie with vs.
 giue you daughters vnto vs and take our daughters vnto you and ye shal dwel with vs and the land shal be before you.
 dwel and do your busines in it and haue your possessions therein.
 shechem also said vnto her father and vnto her brethren let me finde fauour in your eies and i wil giue whatsoeuer ye shal appoint me.
 aske of me abundantly bothe dowrie and giftes and i wil giue as ye appoint me so that ye giue me the maide to wife.
 then the sonnes of iaakob answered shechem and hamor his father talking among them selues deceitfully because he had defiled dinh their sister and they said vnto them we can not do this thing to giue our sister to an vncircumcised man.
 for that were a reprofe vnto vs.
 but in this wil we consent vnto you if ye wil be as we are that euerie man childe among you be circumcised.
 then wil we giue our daughters to you and we wil take your daughters to vs and wil dwel with you and be one people.
 but if ye wil not hearken vnto vs to be circumcised then wil we take our daughter and departe.
 now their wordes pleased hamor and shechem hamors sonne.
 and the yong man deferde not to do the thing because he loued iakobs daughter.
 he was also the moste set by of all his fathers house.
 then hamor and shechem his sonne went vnto the gate of their citie and communed with the men of their citie saying these men are peaceable with vs.
 and that they may dwel in the land and do their affaires therein for beholde the land hathe roume ynough for them let vs take their daughters to wiues and giue them our daughters.
 onely herein wil the men consent vnto vs for to dwel with vs and to be one people if all the men children among vs be circumcised as they are circumcised.
 shal not their flockes and their substance al their cattel be ours.
 onely let vs consent herein vnto them and they wil dwel with vs.
 and vnto hamor and shechem his sonne hearkened all that went out of the gate of his citie.
 and all the men children were circumcised euen al that went out of the gate of his citie.
 and on the third day when they were fore two of the sonnes of iaakb simen and leui dinahs brethren toke ether of them his sworde and went into the boldely and slewe euerie male.
 they slewe also hamr and shechem his sonne with the edge of the sworde toke dinah out of shechems house and went their way.
 again the other sonnes of iaakob came vpon the dead and spoiled the citie because they had defiled their sister.
 they toke their shepe and their beues their asses and whatsoeuer was in the citie and in the fields.
 also they caried away captiue and spoiled all their goods and all their children their wiues and al that was in the houses.
 then iaakob said to simeon and leui ye haue troubled me made me stinke amog the inhabitants of the land aswel the canaanites as the perizzites and i being fewe in nombre they shall gather them selues together against me and slay me and so shall i and my house be destroied.
 and they answered shulde he abuse our sister as a whore.
 then god said to iaakb arise go vp to beth dwel there make there an altar vnto god that appeared vnto thee when thou fleddest from esau thy brother.
 then said iaakb vnto his housholde to all that were with him put away the strange gods that are among you and clense your selues and change your garments.
 for we wil rise and go vp to bethel i will make an altar there vnto god which heard me in the day of my tribulacion was with me in the way whiche i went.
 and they gaue vnto iaakb all the strange gods which were in their hands all their earings which were in their eares and iaakd hid them vnder an oke which was by shechem.
 then they went on their iourney and the feare of god was vpon the cities that were round about them.
 so that they did not followe after the sonnes of iaakb.
 so came iaakb to luz whiche is in the land of canaan.
 the same is bethel he and all the people that was with him.
 and he buylt there an altar and had called the place the god of bethel because that god appeared vnto him there when he fled from his brother.
 then deborah rebekahs nourse dyed and was buryed beneth bethel vnder an oke.
 he called the name of it alln bachuth.
 againe god appeared vnto iaakb after he came out of padan aram blessed hym.
 moreouer god said vnto him thy name is iaakb.
 thy name shal be no more called iaakb but israel shalbe thy name.
 and he called his name israel.
 againe god said vnto him i am god al sufficient growe and multiplie a nation and a multitude of nations shal spring of thee and kings shal come out of thy ioynes.
 also i wil giue the land which i gaue to abraham and izhak vnto thee.
 and vnto thy after thee wil i giue that land.
 so god ascended from him in the place where he had talked with him.
 and iaakb set vp a piller in the place where he talked with him a piller of stone and powred drinke offring thereon.
 also he powred oyle thereon.
 and iaakb called the name of the place where god spake with him bethel.
 then they departed from bethel when there was about halfe a daies iourney of grounde to come to ephrath rahel trauailed and in trauailing she was in peril.
 and when she was in peines of her labour the midwife said vnto her not.
 for thou shalt haue this sonne also.
 then as she was about to yelde vp the goste for she dyed she called his name benony but his father called him beniamin.
 thus dyed rahel and was buryed in the way to ephrath which is beth.
 and iaakb set a piller vpon her graue.
 this is the piller of rahels graue vnto this day.
 then israel went forwarde and pitched his tent beyonde migdaleder.
 now when israel dwelt in that land keube went and laye with bilhah his fathers cocubine and it came to israels eare.
 and iaakb had twelue sonnes.
 the sonnes of leah reuben iaakobs eldest sonne and simeon and leui and iudah and issachar and zebulun.
 the sonnes of rahel.
 ioseph and beniamin.
 and the sonnes of bilhah rahels maide dan and .
 and the sonnes of zilpah leahs maide gad and asher these are the sonnes of iaakb whiche were borne him in padan aram.
 then iaakb came vnto izhak his father to mamre a citie of arbah.
 this is hebrn where abraham and izhak were strangers.
 and the dayes of izhak were an hundreth and foure score yeres.
 and izhak gaue vp the goste and dyed and was gathered vnto his people being olde and ful of daies.
 and his sonnes esau iaakb buryed him.
 now these are the generations of esau whiche is edom.
 esau toke his wiues of the daughter of canaan.
 adah the daughter of eln an hittite and aholibamah the daughter of anah the daughter of ziben an .
 and toke basemath daughter sister of nebaith.
 and adah bare vnto esau eliphz and basemath bare reuel.
 also aholibomah bare iaalam and korah.
 these are the sonnes of esau whiche were borne to him in the land of canaan.
 so esau toke his wiues and his sonnes and his daughters and al the soules of his house and his flockes and all his cattel and all his substance whiche he had gotten in the land of canaan went into another countrey from his brother iaakb.
 for their riches were so great that they cold not dwel together and the land wherein they were strangers colde not receiue them because of their flockes.
 therefore dwelt esau in mount seir.
 this esau is edom.
 so these are the generacions of esau father of edm in mount seir.
 these are the names of esaus sonnes.
 eliphaz the sonne of adah the wife of esau and reuel the sonne of bashemath the wife of esau.
 and the sonnes of eliphz were temn omr zephon and gatam and kenz.
 and timna was concubine to eliphaz esaus sonne and bare vnto eliphaz amalek.
 these be the sonnes of adah esaus wife.
 and these are the sonnes of reuel.
 nhath and zerah shammah and mizzah.
 these were the sonnes of bashemath esaus wife.
 and these were the sonnes of aholibamah the daughter of anah daughter of ziben esaus wife.
 for she vnto esau ieush and iaalam and korah.
 these were dukes of the sonnes of esau the sonnes of eliphaz the first borne of esau duke teman duke omar duke zeph duke kenaz.
 duke korah duke gatam duke amalek.
 these are the dukes that came of eliphaz in the land of edom.
 these were the sonnes of adah.
 and these are the sonnes of reull esaus sonne.
 duke nahath duke zerah duke shammah duke mizzah.
 these are the dukes that came of reuel in the land of edm.
 these are the sonnes of bashemth esaus wife.
 like wise these were the sonnes of aholibamah esaus wife.
 duke ieush duke iaalam duke korah.
 these dukes came of the daughter of anah esaus wife.
 these are the children of esau and these are the dukes of them.
 this esau is edm.
 these are the sonnes of seir the horite which inhabited the land before lotan and shobal and ziben and anah.
 and dishon and ezer and dishan.
 these are the dukes of the horites the sonnes of seir in the land of edm.
 and the sonnes of lotan were hori and hemam and lotans sister was timna.
 and the sonnes of shobal were these.
 aluan and manabath and ebal shepho and .
 and these are the sonnes of zibeon.
 bothe aiah and anah.
 this was anah that founde mules in the wildernes as he fed his father zibeons asses.
 and the children of anah were these.
 dishon and aholibamah the daughter of anah.
 also these are the sonnes of dishan.
 hemdan and eshban and ithran and cheran.
 the sonnes of ezer are these.
 and zaauan and akan.
 the sonnes of dishn are these.
 vz aran these are the dukes of the .
 duke lotan duke shobal duke zibeon duke anah duke duke ezer duke dishan.
 these be the dukes of the horites after their dukedomes in the land of .
 and these are the kings that reigned in the land of edm before there reigned any king ouer the children of israel.
 then bela the sonne of ber reigned in edm and the name of his citie was dinhabah.
 and when bela dyed iobab the sonne of zerah of bozra reigned in his stede.
 when iobab also was dead husham of the land of temani reigned in his stede.
 and after the death of husham.
 hadad the sonne of bedad which slewe in the field of moab reigned in his stede and the name of his citie was auith.
 when hadd was dead then samlah of masrekah reigned in his stede.
 when samlah was dead shaul of rehoboth by the riuer reigned in his stede.
 when shauldyed baalhanan the sonne of of achbr reigned in his stede.
 and after the death of baalhanan the sonne of achbr hadad reigned in his stede and the name of his citie was pau.
 his wiues name mehetabel the daughter of matred the daughter of mezahab.
 then these are the names of the dukes of esau according to their families their places and by their names.
 duke timna duke al uah duke ietheth.
 duke aholibamah duke elah duke pino.
 duke kenaz duke teman duke mibzar.
 duke magdiel duke iram.
 these be the dukes of edm according to their habitacions in the land of their inheritance.
 this esuis the father of edom.
 iaakob nowe dwelt in the land wherin his father was a stranger in the land of canaan.
 these are the generacions of iaakob when ioseph was seuententh yere olde.
 he kepte shepe with his brethren and the childe was with the sonnes of bilhah and with the sonnes of zilpah his fathers wiues.
 and ioseph broght vnto their father their euil saying.
 nowe israel loued ioseph more then all hys sonnes because he begate hym in hys olde age and he made hym a coate of many colours.
 so when his brethren sawe that their father loued hym more then all his brethren then they hated hym and colde not speake peaceably vnto him.
 and ioseph dreamed a dreame and tolde hys brethren who hated hym so muche the more.
 for he said vnto them heare i pray you this dreame whiche i haue dreamed.
 beholde nowe we were bindyng sheues in the middes of the fielde.
 lo my shefe arose and also stode vpryght and beholde your sheues compassed rounde about and did reuerence to my shefe.
 then his brethren said to hym what shalt thou reigne ouer vs and rule vs.
 or shalt thou haue altogether dominio ouer vs.
 and they hated him so muche the more for his dreames and for his wordes.
 agayne he dreamed another dreame and tolde it his brethren and said beholde i haue had one dreame more and beholde the sunne and the moone and eleuen starres dyd reuerence to me.
 then he tolde it vnto his father and to hys brethren and his father rebuked hym and said vnto him what is this dreame whiche thou hast dreamed.
 shal i and thy mother and thy brethren come in dede and fall on the grounde before thee.
 and his brethren enuied him but his father noted the saying.
 then his brethren went to kepe their fathers shepe in shechem.
 and israel sayd vnto ioseph do not thy brethren kepe in shechem.
 come and i wil send thee to them.
 and he answered hym i am here.
 then he said vnto hym go now se whether it be wel with thy brethren and howe the flockes prosper and bryng me worde agayne so he sent him frome the vale of hebron and he came to shechem.
 then a man founde hym for lo he was wandryng in the fielde and the man asked him saying what sekest thou.
 and he aunswered i seke my brethren.
 tell me i pray thee where they kepe shepe.
 and the man said thei are departed hence.
 for i heard them say let vs go vnto dothan.
 then went ioseph after hys brethren and found them in dothan.
 and when they saw him a far of euen before he came at them they conspired against him for to slaie him.
 for they said one to another beholde this dreamer commeth.
 come now therefore and let vs slaye hym and cast him into some pit and we wil say a wicked beast hathe deuoured him.
 then we shal se what wil come of his dreames.
 but when reuben heard that he deliuered him out of their hands and said let vs not kil him.
 also reuben sayde vnto them shed not blood.
 but caste him into thys pit that is in the wildernes and lay no hande vpon hym.
 thus he said that he mightd eliuer him out of their hande and restore him to his father againe.
 nowe when ioseph was come vnto hys brethren they stript ioseph out of his coat his party coloured coate that was vpon him.
 and they toke him and cast him into a pit and the pit was empty without water in it.
 then they sat them downe to eat bread.
 and they lift vp their eyes and loked and beholde there came a company of ishmeelites from gilead and their camels laden with spicerie and rosen and myrrhe and were going to carie it downe into egypt.
 then iudah sayd vnto his brethren what auaileth it if we slaye our brother thogh we kepe his blood secret.
 come and let vs sel him to the ishmeelites and let not our handes be vpon hym for he is our brother and our fleshe.
 and hys brethren obeyed.
 then the midianites marchant men passed by and they drewe forthe and lyft ioseph out of the pit and sold ioseph vnto the ishmeelites for twentie pieces of siluer.
 who broght ioseph into egypt.
 afterwarde reuben returned to the pit and beholde ioseph was not in the pit.
 then he rent his clothes.
 and returned to hys brethren and sayde the childe is not yonder and i whether shall i go.
 and they toke iosephs coate and killed a kid of the goates and depped the coate in the blood.
 so they sent that party coloured coate and they broght it vnto their father and sayde this haue we founde.
 se now whether it be thy sonnes coate or no.
 then he knewe it and said it is my sonnes coat.
 a wicked beast hathe deuoured him.
 ioseph is surely torne in pieces.
 and iaakob rent his clothes and put sackcloth about his loynes and sorowed for his sonne a long season.
 then all his sonnes and al his daughters rose vp to comforte hym but he wolde not be be comforted but sayd surely i will go downe into the graue vnto my sonne mourning.
 so his father wept for him.
 and the medianites solde hym into egypt vnto potiphar an eunuche of pharaohs and his chief stuarde.
 and at that tyme iudah wente downe from his brethren and turned into a man called hirah an adullamite.
 and iudah sawe there the daughter of a man called shuah a canaanite.
 and he toke her to wife and went in vnto her.
 so she conceyued and bare asonne.
 and he called his name er.
 and she conceiued againe and bare a sonne and she called his name onan.
 moreouer she bare yet a sonne whome she called shelah.
 and iudah was at chezib when she bare him.
 then iudah toke a wife to er his first borne sonne whose name was tamar.
 nowe er the first borne of iudah was wicked in the sight of the lorde.
 therefore the lord slewe him.
 then iudah sayd to onan.
 go in vnto thy brothers wife and do the office of a kinsman vnto her and raise vp sede vnto thy brother.
 and onan knewe that the sede shuld not be his.
 therefore when he went in vnto his brothers wife he spilled it on the groude lest he shulde giue sede vnto his brother.
 and it was wicked in the eies of the lorde which he did.
 wherefore he slewe him also.
 then sayd iudah to tamar his daughter in law remaine a widow in thy fathers house til shelah my sonne growe vp for he thoght thus lest he die as well as his brethren so tamar went and dwelt in her fathers house.
 and in processe of time also the daughter of shuah iudahs wyfe dyed.
 then iudah when he had left mourning went vp to his shepe sherers to timnah he and his neyghbour hirah the adullamite.
 and it was tolde tamar saying beholde thy father in lawe goeth vp to timnah to shere his shepe.
 then she put her widowes garmentes of from her and couered her with a vaile and wrapped her selfe and sate downe in pethahenaim which is by the way to timnah because she sawe that shelah was growen and she was not giuen vnto him to wife.
 when iudah sawe her iudged her an whore.
 for she had couered her face.
 and he turned to the way towards her and said come i pray thee let me lye with thee for he knewe not that she was his daughter in lawe and she aunswered what wilt thou giue me for to lie with me.
 then sayd he i will send thee a kid of the goates from the flocke and she said wel if thou wilt giue me a pledge til thou send it.
 then he sayd what is the pledge that i shall giue thee.
 and she aunswered thy signet and thy cloke and thy staffe that is in thine hand.
 so he gaue it her and lay by her and she was with childe by him.
 then she rose and went and put her vayle from her and put on her widowes rayment.
 afterwarde iudah sent a kid of the goates by the hande of his neighbour the adullamite for to receiue his pledge from the womans hand.
 but he founde her not.
 then asked he the men of that place saying where is the whore that sate in by the way side.
 and they answered there was no whore here.
 he came therefore to iudah againe and said i can not finde her and also the men of the place said there was no whore there.
 then iudah said let her take it to her lest we be shamed.
 beholde i sent this kid and thou hast not founde her.
 nowe after thre moneths one tolde iudah saying tamarthy daughter in law hath played the whore and lo with playing the whore she is greate with chylde.
 then iudah sayd bryng ye her forthe and let herbe burnt.
 when she was broght forthe she sent to her father in lawe saying by the man vnto whome these thynges perteine am i with childe.
 and sayd also loke i praye thee whose these are the seale and the cloke and the staffe.
 then iudah knewe them and said she is more righteous.
 then i for she hath done it because i gaue her not to shelah my sonne.
 so he laye with her no more.
 nowe when the time was come that she shulde be deliuered beholde there were twinnes in her wombe.
 and when she was in trauel the one put out his hand.
 and the midwife toke and bounde a red threde aboute his hand saying this is come out first.
 but when he plucked his hand backe againe lo his brother came out and the midwife said howe hast thou broken the breache vpo thee.
 and his name was called pharez.
 and afterwarde came out hys brother that had the red threde about his hand and his name was called zarah.
 nowe ioseph was broght downe into egipt.
 and potiphar an eunuche of pharaohs and his chief stuarde an egyptian boght hym at the hande of the ishmeelites which had broght him thether.
 and the lord was with ioseph and he was a man that prospered and was in the house of his master the egyptian.
 and his master sawe that the lord was with him and that the lord made all that he did to prosper in his hand.
 so ioseph founde fauour in his sight and serued him.
 and he made him ruler of his house and put all that he had in his hand.
 and from that time that he had made him ruler ouer his house and ouer all that he had the lord blessed the egyptians house for iosephs sake.
 and the blessing of the lord was vpon all that he had in the house and in the field.
 therefore he left all that he had in iosephs hand and toke accompte of nothing that was with him saue onely of the bread which he did eat.
 and ioseph was a faire personne and wel fauoured.
 now therefore after these things his masters wife cast her eyes vpon ioseph and said lye with me.
 but he refused and said to his masters wife beholde my master knoweth not what he hathe in the house with me but hathe committed all that he hathe to mine hand.
 there is no man greater in this house then i.
 nether hathe he kept any thing from me but only thee because thou art his wife.
 how then can i do this great wickednes and so sinne against god.
 and albeit she spake to ioseph day by day yet he hearkened not vnto her to lye with her or to be in her companie.
 then on a certeine day ioseph entred into the house to do his busines.
 and there was no man of the housholde in the house.
 therefore she caught him by his garment saying slepe with me.
 but he left his garment in her hand and fled and got him out.
 now when she sawe that he had left his garment in her hand and was fled out she called vnto the men of her house and tolde them saying beholde he hathe broght in an ebrewe vnto vs to mocke vs.
 who came into me for to haue slept with me.
 but i cryed with a loude voyce.
 and when he heard that i lift vp my voyce and cryed he left his garment with me and fled away and got him out.
 so she layed vp his garment by her vntil her lord came home.
 then she tolde him according to these wordes saying the ebrewe seruant which thou hast brogt vnto vs came into me to mocke me.
 but assone as i lift vp my voyce and cryed he left his garment with me aud fled out.
 then when his master heard the wordes of his wife which she tolde him saying after this maner did thy seruant to me his angre was kindled.
 and iosephs master toke him and put him in prison in the place where the kings prisoners lay bounde.
 and there he was in prison.
 but the lord was with ioseph and shewed him mercie and got him fauour in the sight of the master of the prison.
 and the keper of the prison commited to iosephs hand all the prisoners that were in the prison and whatsoeuer they did there that did he.
 and the keper of the prison loked vnto nothing that was vnder his hand seing that the lord was with him.
 for whatsoeuer he did the lord made it to prosper.
 and after these things the butler of the king of egypt and his baker offended their lord the king of egypt.
 and pharaoh was angry against his two officers against the chief butler and against the chief baker.
 therefore he put them inwarde in his chief stuardes house in the prison and place where ioseph was bounde.
 and the chief stuarde gaue ioseph charge ouer them and he serued them.
 and they continued a season inwarde.
 and they bothe dreamed a dreame ether of them his dreame in one night eche one according to the interpretatio of his dreame bothe the butler the baker of the king of egypt which were bounde in the prison.
 and when ioseph came in vnto them in the morning and loked vpon them he holde they were sad.
 and he asked pharaohs officers that were with him in his masters warde saying wherefore loke ye so sadly to day.
 who answered him we haue dreamed eche one a dreame there is none to interpret the same then ioseph said vnto them are not interpretations of god.
 tel then me now.
 so the chief butler tolde his dreame to ioseph and said vnto him in my dreame beholde a vine was before me and in the vine were thre branches and as it budded her floure came forthe.
 and the clusters of grapes waxed ripe.
 and i had pharaohs cup in mine hand and i toke the grapes and wrong them into pharaohs cup and i gaue the cup into pharaohs hand.
 then ioseph said vnto him this is the interpretation of it.
 the thre branche are thre dayes.
 within thre dayes shal pharaoh lift vp thine head and restore thee vnto thine office and thou shalt giue pharaohs cup into his hand after the olde maner when thou wast his butler.
 but haue me in remembrance with thee when thou art in good case and shewe mercie i pray thee vnto me and make mencion of me to pharaoh that thou maiest bring me out of this house.
 for i was stollen away by theft out of the land of the ebrewes and here also haue i done nothing wherefore they shulde put me in the dungeon.
 and when the chief baker sawe that the interpretacion was good he said vnto ioseph also me thoght in my dreame that i had thre white baskets on mine head.
 and in the vppermost basket there was of all maner baken meates for pharaoh.
 and the birdes did eat them out of the basket vpon mine head.
 then ioseph answered and said this is the interpretacion thereof.
 the thre baskets are thre dayes.
 within thre daies shal pharaoh take thine head from thee and shal hang thee on a tre and the birdes shal eat thy flesh from of thee.
 and so the third day which was pharaohs birthday he made a feast vnto all his seruantes.
 and he lifted vp the head of the chief butler and the head of the chief baker among his seruantes.
 and he restored the chief butler vnto his butlership who gaue the cup into pharaohs hand but he hanged the chief baker as ioseph had interpreted vnto them.
 yet the chief butler did not remembre ioseph but forgat him.
 and two yeres after pharaoh also dreamed and beholde he stode by a riuer and lo there came out of the riuer seuen goodlie kine and fatfleshed and thei fed in a medow.
 and lo seuen other kine came vp after them out of the riuer euil fauoured and leane fleshed and stode by the other kine vpon the brinke of the riuer.
 and the euil fauoured and leane fleshed kine did eat vp the seuen wel fauoured and fat kine.
 so pharaoh awoke.
 againe he slept and dreamed the seconde time.
 beholde seuen eares of corne grewe vpon one stalke ranke and goodlie.
 and lo seuen thinne eares and blasted with the east winde sprang vp after them.
 and the thinne eares deuoured the seuen ranke and ful eares then pharaoh awaked and lo it was a dreame.
 now when the morning came his spirite was troubled.
 therefore he sent and called all the sothesaiers of egypt and all the wise men thereof and pharaoh tolde them his dreames.
 but none colde interpret them to pharaoh.
 then spake the chief butler vnto pharaoh saying i call to minde my fautes this day.
 pharaoh being angry with his seruantes put me inwarde in the chief stuardes house bothe me and the chief baker.
 then we dreamed a dreame in one night bothe i and he.
 we dreamed eche man according to the interpretacion of his dreame.
 and there was with vs a yong man an ebrewe seruant vnto the chief stuarde whome when we tolde he declared our dreames to vs to euerie one he declared according to his dreame.
 and as he declared vnto vs so it came to passe.
 for he restored me to mine office and hanged him.
 then sent pharaoh and called ioseph and they broght him hastely out of prison and he shaued him and changed his raiment and came to pharaoh.
 then pharaoh said to ioseph i haue dreamed a dreame and no man can interpret it and i haue heard say of thee that when thou hearest a dreame thou canst interpret it.
 and ioseph answered pharaoh saying without me god shal answer for the welth of pharaoh.
 and pharaoh said vnto ioseph in my dreame beholde i stode by the banke of the riuer and lo there came vp out of the riuer seuen fatfleshed and wel fauoured kine and thei fed in the medow.
 also lo seuen other kine came vp after them poore very euil fauoured leanefleshed i neuer sawe the like in all the land of egypt for euil fauoured.
 and the leane and euil fauoured kine did eat vp the first seuen fat kine.
 and when they had eaten them vp it colde not be knowen that they had eaten them but they were stil as euil fauoured as they were at the beginning.
 so did i awake.
 moreouer i sawe in my dreame and beholde seuen eares sprang out of one stalke ful and faire.
 and lo seuen eares withered thinne and blasted with the east winde sprang vp after them.
 and the thinne eares deuoured the seuen good eares.
 now i haue tolde the sothesaiers and none can declare it vnto me.
 then ioseph answered pharaoh bothe pharaohs dreames are one.
 god hathe shewed pharaoh what he is about to do.
 the seuen good kine are seuen yeres and the seuen good eares are seuen yeres.
 this is one dreame.
 like wise the seuen thinne and euil fauoured kine that came out after them are seuen yeres.
 and the seuen emptie eares blasted with the east winde are seuen yeres of famine.
 this is the thing which i haue said vnto pharaoh that god hathe shewed vnto pharaoh what he is aboute to do.
 beholde there come seuen yeres of great plentie in all the land of egypt.
 againe there shal arise after them seuen yeres of famine so that all the plentie shalbe forgottten in the land of egypt and the famine shal consume the land.
 nether shal the plentie be knowen in the land by reason of this famine that shal come after.
 for it shalbe exceading great.
 and therfore the dreame was doubled vnto pharaoh the second time because the thing is established by god and god hasteth to performe it.
 now therefore let pharaoh prouide for a man of vnderstanding and wisdome and set him ouer the land of egypt.
 let pharaoh make and appoint officers ouer the land and take vp the fifte parte of the land of egypt in the seuen plenteous yeres.
 also let them gather all the fode of these good yeres that come and lay vp corne vnder the hand of pharaoh for fode in the cities and let them kepe it.
 so the fode shalbe for the prouision of the land against the seuen yeres of famine whiche shalbe in the land of egypt that the land perish not by famine.
 and the saying pleased pharah and all his seruantes.
 then said pharaoh vnto his seruantes can we finde suche a man as this in whome is the spirit of god.
 then pharaoh said to ioseph for as muche as god hath shewed thee al this there is no man of vnderstanding or of wisdome lyke vnto thee.
 thou shalt be ouer mine house and at thy worde shall al my people be armed onely in the kings throne wil i be aboue thee.
 moreouer pharaoh said to ioseph beholde i haue set thee ouer all the land of egypt.
 and pharaoh toke of his ring frome his hand and put it vpon iosephs hand araied him in garments of fine linen and put a golden cheine about his necke.
 so he set him vpon the best charet that he had saue one.
 they cryed before him abrech placed him ouer al the land of egipt againe pharaoh said vnto ioseph i am pharaoh without thee shal no man lift vp his hand or his fote in al the land of egypt.
 and pharaoh called iosephs name zaphnathpaaneah.
 and he gaue hym to wife asenath the daughter of potipherah prince of on then went ioseph abroad in the land of egypt.
 and ioseph was thirty yere olde when he stode before pharaoh kyng of egypt.
 and ioseph departing from the presence of pharaoh went through out all the land of egypt.
 and in the seuen plenteous yeres the earth broght forthe store.
 and he gathered vp al the fode of the seuen plenteous yeres whiche were in the land of egypt and layed vp fode in the cities.
 the fode of the field that was rounde about euery citie layed he vp in the same.
 so ioseph gathered wheat like vnto the sand of the sea in multitude out of measure vntil he left nombring.
 for it was nombre.
 now vnto ioseph were borne two sonnes before the yeres of famine came whiche asenath the daughter of potipherah prince of on bare vnto hym.
 and ioseph called the name of the first borne manasseh.
 for god said he hathe made me forget all my labour and all my fathers housholde.
 also he called the name of the seconde ephraim.
 for god said he hath made me fruteful in the land of mine affliction.
 so the seuen yeres of the plentie that was in the land of egypt were ended.
 then began the seuen yeres of famine to come accordyng as ioseph had said.
 and the famine was in al landes.
 but in all the land of egypt was bread.
 at the length al the land of egypt was affamished and the people cryed to pharaoh for bread.
 and pharaoh said vnto all the egyptians go to ioseph.
 what he saith to you do ye.
 when the famine was vpon all the land ioseph opened all places wherein the store was and solde vnto the egyptians.
 for the famine waxed sore in the land of egypt.
 and all countreis came to egypt to bye corne of ioseph because the famine was sore in all landes.
 then iaakob sawe that there was fode in egypt and iaakob said vnto his sonnes why gaze ye one vpon another.
 and he said behold i haue heard that there is fode in egypt get you downe thether and bye vs fode thence that we may liue and not dye.
 so went iosephs ten brethren downe to bye corne of the egyptians.
 but beniamin iosephs brother wolde not iaakob send with his brethren.
 for he said lest death shulde befall him.
 and the sonnes of israel came to bye fode among them that came.
 for there was famine in the land of canaan.
 now ioseph was gouerner of the land who solde to all the people of the land.
 then iosephs brethren came and bowed their face to the grounde before him.
 and when ioseph sawe his brethren he knewe them and made him selfe strange toward them and spake to them roughly said vnto them whence come ye.
 who answered out of the land of canaan to bye vitaile.
 now ioseph knewe his brethren but they knewe not him.
 and ioseph remembred the dreames which he dreamed of them and he said vnto them ye are spies and are come to se the weakenes of the land.
 but they said vnto him nay my lord but to bye vitaile thy seruantes are come.
 we are alone mans sonnes.
 we meane trnely and thy seruantes are no spies.
 but he said vnto them nay but ye are come to sethe weakenes of the land.
 and they said we thy seruantes are twelue brethren the sonnes of one man in the land of canaan.
 and beholde the yongest is this day with our father and one is not.
 ioseph said vnto them this is it that i spake vnto you saying ye are spies.
 hereby ye shalbe proued.
 by the life of pharaoh ye shal not go hence except your yongest brother come hether.
 send one of you whiche may fet your brother and ye shal be kept in prison that your wordes may be proued whether there be trueth in you.
 or els by the life of pharaoh ye are but spies.
 so he put them inwarde thre dayes.
 then ioseph said vnto them the third day this do and liue.
 for i feare god.
 if ye be true men let one of your brethren be bounde in your prison house and go ye carie fode for the famine of your houses.
 but bring your yonger brother vnto me that your wordes may be tried and that ye die not.
 and they did so.
 and they said one to another we haue verely sinned against our brother in that we sawe the of his soule when he besoght vs we wolde not heare him.
 therfore is this trouble come vpon vs and reuben answered them saying warned i not you saying sinne not against the child and ye wolde not heare.
 and lo his blood is now required.
 and they were not aware that ioseph vnderstode them.
 for he spake vnto them by an interpreter.
 then he turned from them and wept and turned to them againe and communed with them and simen from among them and bounde him before their eyes.
 so ioseph commanded that they shulde their sackes with wheat and put mans money againe in his sacke giue them vitaile for the iourney.
 and thus did he vnto them.
 and they laied their vitaile vpon their asses and departed thence.
 and as one of them opened his sacke for to giue his asse prouandre in the ynne he espied his money.
 for lo it was in his sackes mouthe.
 then he said vnto his brethren my money is restored.
 for lo it is euen in my sacke.
 and their hearts failed them they were astonished and said one to another what is this that god hathe done vnto vs.
 and they came vnto iaakob their father vnto the land of canaan and tolde hym all that be fallen them saying.
 the man who is lord of the land speake roughly to vs and put vs in prison as spies of the countrey.
 and we said vnto him we are true men and are not spies.
 we be twelue brethren of our father.
 one is not and the yongest is this day with our father in the land of canaan.
 then the lord of the countrey said vnto vs hereby shal i knowe if ye be true men.
 leaue one of your brethren with me take fode for the famine of your houses and departe.
 and bring your yongest brother vnto me that i may knowe that ye are no spies but true men.
 so wil i deliuer you your brother and ye shal occupie in the land.
 and as they empted their sackes beholde euerie mans bundel of monei was in his sacke and when they and their father sawe the bundels of their money they were afraied.
 then their father said to them ye haue robbed me of my children.
 ioseph is not and simen is not and ye wil take beniamin.
 all these things are against me.
 then reuben answered his father saying slay my two sonnes if i bring him not to thee againe.
 deliuer him to mine hand and i will bring him to thee againe.
 but he said my sonne shall not go downe with you.
 for his brother is dead he is left alone.
 if death come vnto him by the way which ye go then ye shal bring my graie head with sorowe vnto the graue.
 now great famine was in the land.
 and when they had eaten vp the vitaile which they had broght from egypt their father said vnto them turne againe and bye vs a litle fode.
 and iudah answered him saying the man charged vs by an othe saying neuer se my face except your brother be with you.
 if thou wilt send our brother with vs we wil go downe and by thee fode.
 but if thou wilt not send him we will not go downe.
 for the man said vnto vs loke me not in the face except your brother be with you.
 and israel said wherefore delt ye so euill with me as to tel the man whether ye had yet a brother or no.
 and they answered the man asked straitly of our selues and of our kinred saying is your father yet aliue.
 haue ye any brother.
 and we tolde him according to these wordes.
 colde we know certeinly that he wolde say bring your brother downe.
 then said iudah to israel his father send the boye with me that we may rise and go and that we may liue and not dye bothe we and thou and our children.
 i wil be suretie for him.
 of mine hand shalt thou require him.
 if i bring hym not to thee and set him before thee then let me beare the blame for euer.
 for except we had made this tarying doutles by this we had returned the seconde time then their father israel said vnto them if it must nedes be so nowe do thus.
 take of the best frutes of the land in your vessels bring the man a present a litle rosen and a litle honie spices and nuttes and almondes.
 and take double money in your hand and the money that was broght againe in your sackes mouthes.
 carie it againe in your hand lest it were some ouersight.
 take also your brother and arise and go againe to the man.
 and god almightie giue you mercie in the sight of the man that deliuer you your other brother beniamin.
 but i shalbe robbed of my childe as i haue bene.
 thus the men toke this present and toke twise so muche money in their hands with beniamin and rose vp and went downe to egypt and stode before ioseph.
 and when ioseph sawe beniamin with them he said to his stuard bring these men home and kil meat and make readie.
 for the men shall eat with me at noone.
 and the man did as ioseph bad and broght the men vnto iosephs house.
 now when the men were broght into iosephs house thei were afraied and said because of the money that came in our sackes mouths at the first time are we broght that he maie pike a quarel against vs and laye some thing to our charge bring vs in bondage and our asses.
 therefore came they to iosephs stuard and communed with hym at the dore of the house.
 and said oh syr we came in dede downe hether at the first time to bye fode.
 and as we came to an ynne and opened our sackes beholde euerie mans money was in his sackes mouth euen our money in ful weight but we haue broght it againe in our hands.
 also other money haue we broght in our handes to bye fode but we can not tel who put our money in our sackes.
 and he said peace be vnto you feare not.
 your god and the god of your father hath giuen you that treasure in your sackes i had your money.
 he broght forth simeon to them.
 so the man led them into iosephs house and gaue them water to wash their fete gaue their asses prouander.
 and they made redy their present against ioseph came at none for they heard saie that they shulde eat bread there.
 when ioseph came home they broght the present into the house to him which was in their hands bowed downe to the grounde before him.
 and he asked them of their prosperitie said is your father the olde man of whome ye tolde me in good health.
 is he yet aliue.
 who answered thy seruant our father is in good helth he is yet aliue.
 and they bowed downe and made obeisance.
 and he lifting vp his eies behelde his brother beniamin his mothers sonne and said is this your yonger brother of whome ye tolde me.
 and he said god be merciful vnto thee my sonne.
 and ioseph made haste for his affection was inflamed toward his brother and soght where to wepe and entred into his chambre and wept there.
 afterward he washed his face came out refrained him selfe said set on meat.
 and they prepared for him by him selfe and for them by them selues and for the egyptians which did eat with him by them selues because the egyptians might not eat bread with the ebrewes.
 for that was an abominacion vnto the egyptians.
 so they sate before him.
 the eldest according vnto his age and the yongest according vnto his you the and the men marueiled among them selues.
 and thei toke meases from before him and sent to them.
 but beniamins mease was fiue times so muche as anie of theirs.
 and thei dronke had of the best drinke with him.
 afterwarde he commanded his stuard saying the mens sackes with fode.
 as muche as thei can cary and put euerie mans money in sackes mouthe.
 and put my cup i meane the siluer cup in the sackes mouthe of the yongest and his corne money.
 and he did according to the commandement that ioseph gaue him and in the morning the men were sent away thei and their asses.
 and when thei went out of the citie not farre of ioseph said to his stuard vp followe after the men.
 and when thou doest ouertake them say vnto them wherefore haue ye rewarded euil for good.
 is that not the cup wherein my lord drinketh.
 and in the which he doeth deuine prophecie.
 ye haue done euil in so doing.
 and when he ouertoke them he said those wordes vnto them.
 and thei answered him wherfore saieth my lord suche wordes.
 god forbid that thy seruants shulde do suche a thing.
 beholde the money which we found in our sackes mouthes we broght againe to thee out of the land of canaan.
 how then shuld we steale out of thy lordes house siluer or golde with whome soeuer of thy seruants it be founde let him dye and we also wil be my lords bondmen.
 and he said now then let it be according vnto your wordes.
 he with whom it is founde shal be my seruant and ye shal be blameles.
 then at once euerie man toke downe his sacke to the grounde and euerie one opened his sacke.
 and he searched and began at the eldest left at the yongest.
 and the cup was founde in beniamins sacke.
 then they rent their clothes laded euerie man his asse went againe into the citie so iudah and his brethren came to iosephs house for he was yet there and they before him on the grounde.
 then said vnto them what acte is this whiche haue done.
 knowe ye not that suche a man as i can deuine and prophecie then said iudah what shall we say vnto my lord.
 what shall we speake.
 and how can we iustifie ourselues.
 god hath founde out the wickednes of thy seruants.
 beholde we are seruants to my lord bothe we and he with whome the cup is founde.
 but he answered god forbid that i shulde do but the man with whome the cup is founde he shal be my seruant and go ye in peace vnto your father.
 then iudah drewe nere vnto him and said oh my lord let thy seruant now speake a worde in my lords eares let not wrath be kindled against thy seruant.
 for thou art euen as pharaoh.
 my lord asked his seruants saying haue yea father or a brother.
 and we answered my lord we haue a father that is a yong which he begat in his age.
 and his brother is dead and he alone is left of his mother and his father loueth him.
 now thou saidest vnto thy seruants bryng hym vnto me that i may set mine eie vpon him.
 and we answered my lord the childe can not departe from his father.
 for if he leaue his father his wolde dye.
 then saidest thou vnto thy seruants except your yonger brother come downe with you loke in my face no more.
 so when we came vnto thy seruant our father shewed hym what my lord had said.
 and our father said vnto vs go againe bye vs a litle fode.
 then we answered we can not go downe.
 but if our yongest brother go with vs then wil we go downe.
 for we may not se the mans face except our yongest brother be with vs then thy seruant my father said vnto vs ye knowe that my wife bare me two sonnes and the one went out from me and i said of a surety he is torne in pieces and i sawe him not since.
 now ye take this also away from me.
 if death take him then ye shal bring my gray head in sorowe to the graue.
 now therefore when i come to thy seruant my father and the childe be not with vs seing that his life dependeth on the childes life then when he shal se that the childe is not come he wil dye.
 so shal thy seruants bring the gray head of thy seruant our father with sorowe to the graue.
 doutles thy seruant became suretie for the childe to my father and said if i bring him not vnto thee againe then i wil beare the blame vnto my father for euer.
 now therefore i pray thee let me thy seruant bide for the childe as a seruant to my lord and let the childe go vp with his brethren.
 for how can i go vp to my father if the childe be not with me onles i wolde se the euil that shal come on my father.
 then ioseph colde not refraine him selfe before all that stode by him but he cried haue forthe euerie man from me.
 and there taried not one with him while ioseph vttered himselfe vnto his brethren.
 and he wept and cryed so that the egyptians heard.
 the house of pharaoh heard also.
 then ioseph said to his brethren i am ioseph.
 doeth my father yet liue.
 but his brethren colde not answer him for thei were astonished at his presence.
 againe ioseph said to his brethren come nere i pray you to me.
 and thei came nere.
 and he said i am ioseph your brother whome ye solde into egypt.
 now therefore be not sad nether grieued with your selues that ye solde me hether.
 for god did send me before you for your preseruation.
 for now two yeres of famine haue bene through the land and fiue yeres are behinde wherein nether shal be earing nor haruest.
 wherefore god sent me before you to preserue your posteritie in this land and to saue you aliue by a great deliuerance.
 now then you sent not me hether but god who hathe made me a father vnto pharaoh and lord of all his house and ruler through out all the land of egypt.
 haste you and go vp to my father and tel him thus saieth thy sonne ioseph god hathe made me lord of all egypt.
 come downe to me tary not.
 and thou shalt dwel in the land of gshen and shalt be nere me thou and thy children and thy childrens children and thy shepe thy beastes and all that thou hast.
 also i wil nourish thee there for yet remaine fiue yeres of famine lest thou perish through pouertie thou and thy housholde and all that thou hast.
 and beholde your eies do se and the eies of my brother beniamin that my mouth speaketh to you.
 therefore tel my father of all mine honour in egypt and of all that ye haue sene and make haste and bring my father hether.
 then he fel on his brother beniamins necke wept beniamin wept on his necke moreouer he kissed all his brethren and wept vpon them.
 and afterwarde his brethren talked with him.
 and the tydings came vnto pharaohs house so that thei said iosephs brethren are come.
 and it pleased pharaoh wel and his seruants.
 then pharaoh said vnto ioseph say to thy brethren this do ye lade your bestes and departe go to the land of canaan and take your father and your housholdes and come to me and i wil giue you the best of the land of egypt and ye shal eat of the fat of the land.
 and i commande thee thus do ye take you charets out of the land of egypt for your children and for your wiues and bring your father and come.
 also regard not your stuffe.
 for the best of all the land of egypt is yours.
 and the children of israel did so.
 and ioseph gaue them charets according to the commandement of pharaoh he gaue them vitaile also for the iourney.
 he gaue them all none except change of raiment.
 but vnto beniamin he gaue thre hundreth pieces of siluer and fine sutes of rayment.
 and vnto his father like wise he sent ten he asses laden with the best things of egypt ten she asses laden with wheat and bread and meat for his father by the way.
 so sent he his brethren away and thei departed.
 and he said vnto them fal not out by the way.
 then thei went vp from egypt and came vnto the land of canaan vnto iaakob their father and tolde him saying ioseph is yet aliue and he also is gouerner ouer all the land of egypt and iaakobs heart failed.
 for he beleued them not.
 and thei tolde him all the wordes of ioseph which he had said vnto them.
 but when he sawe the charets which ioseph had sent to cary him then the spirit of their father reuiued.
 and israel i haue ynough.
 ioseph my sonne is yet aliue.
 i wil go and se him yer i dye.
 then israel toke his iourney with all that he had and came to beer and offred sacrifice vnto the god of his father izhak.
 and god spake vnto israel in a vision by night saying iaakob iaakob.
 who answered i am here.
 then he said i am god the god of thy father feare not to go downe into egypt.
 for i wil there make of thee a great nation.
 i wil go downe with thee into egypt and i wil also bring thee vp againe and ioseph shal put his hand vpon thine eies.
 then iaakob rose vp from beersheb.
 and the sonnes of israel iaakob their father and their children and their wiues in the charets which pharaoh had sent to cary him.
 and thei toke their and their goods which they had gotten in the land of canaan and came into egypt bothe iaakob and all his sede with him his sonnes and his sonnes sonnes with him his daughters and his sonnes daughters and all his sede broght the with him into egypt.
 and these are the names of the children of israel which came into egypt euen iaakob and his sonnes.
 reuben iaakobs first borne.
 and the sonnes of reuben hanoch and and hezron and carmi.
 and the sonnes of simeon.
 iemuel and iamin and o had and iachin and zohar and shaul the sonne of a canaanitish woman.
 also the sonnes of leui.
 gershon kohath and merari.
 also the sonnes of iudah.
 er and onan and shelah and pharez and zerah.
 but er and onan dyed in the land of canaan and the sonnes of pharez were hezron and hamul.
 also the sonnes of issachar.
 tola and phuuah and iob and shimron.
 also the sonnes of zebulun.
 sered and elon and iahleel.
 these be the sonnes of leah which she bare vnto iaakob in padan aram with his daughter dinah.
 all the soules of his sonnes his daughters were thirty and thre.
 the sonnes of gad.
 ziphion and haggi shuni and ezbon eri and arodi and areli.
 also the sonnes of asher.
 iimnah and ishuah and and beriah and serah their sister.
 and the sonnes of beriah.
 heber and malchiel.
 these are the children of zilpah whome laban gaue to leah his daughter.
 and these she bare vnto iaakob euen sixtene soules.
 the sonnes of iaakobs wife were ioseph and beniamin.
 and vnto ioseph in the land of egypt were borne manasseh and ephraim which asenath the daughter of potipherah prince of on bare vnto him.
 also the sonnes of beniamin.
 belah and becher and ashbel gera and naaman ehi rosh mupppim huppim ard.
 these are the sonnes of rahel which were borne vnto iaakob fourtene soules in all.
 also the sonnes of dan.
 hushim.
 also the sonnes of nephtali.
 iahzeel and guni and lezer and shillem.
 these are the sonnes of bilhah which laban gaue vnto rahel his daughter and she bare these to iaakob in all seuen soules.
 all the soules that came with iakob into egypt which came out of his loynes beside iakobs sonnes wiues were in the whole thre score and sixe soules.
 also the sonnes of ioseph which were borne him in egypt were two .
 so that all the soules of the house of iaakob which came into egypt are seuentie.
 then he sent iudh before him vnto ioseph to direct his way vnto goshen and they came into the land of goshen.
 then ioseph made ready his charet and went vp to goshen to mete israel his father and presented him selfe vnto him and fel on his necke and wept vpon his necke a good while.
 and israel said vnto ioseph now let me dye since i haue sene thy face that thou art yet aliue.
 then ioseph said to his brethren and to his fathers house i wil go vp and shewe pharaoh and tel him my brethren and my fathers house which were in the land of canaan are come vnto me and the men are e shepherdes and because they are shepherdes they haue broght their shepe and their cattel and all that thei haue.
 and if pharaoh call you and aske you what is your trade.
 then ye shal say thy seruants are men occupied about cattel from our childhode euen vnto this time bothe we and our fathers.
 that ye may dwel in the land of goshen.
 for euerie shepekeper is an f abominacion vnto the egyptians.
 then came ioseph and tolde pharaoh said my father and my brethren and their shepe and their and all that they haue are come out of the land of canaan beholde they are in the land of .
 and ioseph toke parte of his brethren euen a fiue men and presented them vnto pharaoh.
 then pharaoh said vnto his brethren what is your trade.
 and thei answered pharaoh thy seruants are shepherdes both we and our fathers.
 thei said moreouer vnto pharaoh for to soiourne in the land are we come.
 for thy seruants haue no pasture for their shepe so sore is the famine in the land of canaan.
 now therefore we pray thee let thy seruants dwel in the land of goshen.
 then spake pharaoh to ioseph saying thy father and thy brethren are come vnto thee.
 the land of egypt is before thee.
 in the best place of the land make thy father and thy brethren dwel.
 let them dwel in the land of goshen.
 and if thou knowest that there be men of actiuitie among them make them rulers ouer my cattel.
 ioseph also broght iaakob his father and set him before pharaoh.
 and iaakob saluted pharaoh.
 then pharaoh said vnto iaakob how olde art thou.
 and iaakob said vnto pharaoh the whole time of my pilgrimage is an hundreth and thirty yeres.
 fewe and euil haue the dayes of my life bene and i haue not atteined vnto the yeres of the life of my fathers in he dayes of their pilgrimages.
 and iaakob toke leaue of pharaoh and departed from the presence of pharaoh.
 and ioseph placed his father and his brethren and gaue them possession in the land of egypt in the best of the land euen in the land of rameses as pharaoh had commanded.
 and ioseph nourished his father and his brethren and all his fathers housholde with bread euen to the yong children.
 now there was no bread in all the land.
 for the famine was exceading sore.
 so that the land of egypt and the land of canaan were famished by the reason of the famine.
 and ioseph gathered all the money that was founde in the land of egypt and in the land of canaan for the corne which they boght and ioseph laied vp the money in pharaohs house.
 so when money failed in the land of egyt and in the land of canaan then all the egyptians came vnto ioseph and said giue vs bread.
 for why shulde we dye before thee.
 for our money is spent.
 then said ioseph bring your cattel and i wil giue you for your cattel if your money be spent.
 so they broght their cattel vnto ioseph ioseph gaue them bread for the horses and forthe flockes of shepe and for the herdes of cattel and for the asses.
 so he fed them with bread for all their cattel that yere.
 but when the yere was ended they came vnto him the next yere and said vnto him we wil not hide from my lord that since our money is spent and my lord hathe the herdes of the cattel there is nothing left in the sight of my lord but our bodies and our grounde.
 why shal we perish in thy sight bothe we and our land.
 bye vs and our land for bread and we our land wil be bonde to pharaoh.
 therefore giue vs sede that we may liue and not dye and that the land go not to waste.
 so ioseph boght all the land of egypt for pharaoh.
 for the egyptians solde euerie man his grounde because the famine was sore vppon them.
 so the land became pharaohs.
 and he remoued the people vnto the cities from one side of egypt euen to the other.
 onely the land of the priests boghthe not.
 for the priests had an ordinarie of pharaoh and they did eat their ordinarie which pharaoh gaue them.
 wherefore they solde not their grounde.
 then ioseph said vnto the people behold i haue boght you this day and your land for pharaoh.
 here is sede for you.
 so we therfore the grounde.
 and of the encrease ye shall gyue the fifte parte vnto pharaoh and foure partes shal be yours for the sede of the fielde and for your meat and for them of your housholdes and for your children to eat.
 then they aunswered thou hast saued our liues.
 let vs finde grace in the sight of my lorde and we wil be pharaohs seruants.
 then ioseph made it a law ouer the land of egypt vnto this day that pharaoh shuld haue the fift parte except the lande of the priestes onely which was not pharaohs.
 and israeld welt in the land of egypt in the conntrey of goshen.
 and they had their possessions therein and grewe and multiplied exceadingly.
 moreouer iaakob liued in the land of egypt seuentene yeres so that the whole age of iaakob was an hundreth fourtie and seuen yere.
 now when the time drewe nere that israel muste dye he called his sonne ioseph and said vnto hym if i haue nowe founde grace in thy sight put thine hand nowe vnder my thigh and deale mercifully and truely with me.
 bury me not i pray thee in egypt.
 but when i shall slepe wyth my fathers thou shalte cary me out of egypt and bury me in their burial.
 and he answered i wil do as thou hast said.
 then he said sweare vnto me.
 and he sweare vnto him.
 and israel worshipped towarde the beds head.
 againe after this one sayd to ioseph lo thy father is sicke.
 then he toke with him his two sonnes manasseh and ephraim.
 also one tolde iaakob and said behold thy sonne ioseph is come to thee israel toke hys strength vnto hym sate vpon the bed then iaakob sayd vnto ioseph god almyghtye appeared vnto me at luz in the land of canaan and blessed me.
 and he said vnto me.
 beholde i will make thee fruteful and wil multiplie thee and will make a greate nombre of people of thee and wil giue this land vnto thy sede after thee for an euerlasting possession.
 and nowe thy two sonnes manasseh and ephraim whiche are borne vnto thee in the lande of egypte before i came to thee into egypt shalbe mine as reuben and simeon are mine.
 but thy lignage whiche thou hast begotten after them shalbe thyne.
 they shalbe called after the names of their brethren in their enheritance.
 now when i came from padan rahel dyed vpon myne hande in the land of canaan by the way when there was but halfe a dayes iourney of grounde to come to ephrath.
 and i buryed her therein the waye to ephrath.
 the same is bethlehem.
 then israel behelde iosephs sonnes and said whose are these.
 and ioseph said vnto his father they are my sonnes whiche god hathe giuen me here then he said i praye thee bring them to me that i may blesse them.
 for the eyes of israel were dim for age so that he colde not welse then he caused them to come to hym and he kyssed them and embraced them.
 and israel sayd vnto ioseph i had not thoght to haue sene thy face.
 yet lo god hathe shewed me also thy sede.
 and ioseph toke them away from his knees and did reuerence downe to the ground.
 then toke ioseph them bothe ephraim in his right hand toward israels left hande and manasseh in hys left hande towarde israels right hand so he broght them vnto him.
 but israel stretched out his right hand and laid it on ephraims head whiche was the yonger and his left hande vpon manassehs head directing his hands of purpose for manasseh was the elder.
 also he blessed ioseph and sayd the god before whome my fathers abraham and izhak did walke the god whyche hathe fed me all my life long vnto this daye blesse thee.
 the angell whyche hathe deliuered me from all euill blesse the children and let my name be named vppon them and the name of my fathers abraham and izhak that they maye growe as fishe into a multitude in the middes of the earth.
 but when ioseph sawe that his father layd his right hand vpon the head of ephraim it displeased him.
 and he stayed hys fathers hande to remoue it from ephraims head to manassehs head.
 and ioseph said vnto his father not so my father for this is the eldest.
 put thy right hand vpon his head.
 but hys father refused and sayd i knowe well my sonne i knowe well.
 he shalbe also a people and he shalbe great like wise.
 but his yonger brother shalbe greater then he.
 and his sede shalbe ful of nations.
 so he blessed them that daye and sayd in thee israel shal blesse and say god make thee as ephraim and as manasseh and he set ephraim before manasseh.
 then israel said vnto ioseph behold i dye and god shalbe with you and bryng you againe vnto the land of your fathers.
 moreouer i haue giuen vnto thee one porcion aboue thy brethren which i gate out of the hand of the amorite by my sworde and by my bowe.
 then iaakob called his sonnes and sayd gather your selues together that i maye tell you what shall come to you in the laste dayes.
 gather your selues together and heare ye sonnes of iaakob and hearken vnto israel your father.
 reuben myne eldest sonne thou art my myght and the begynning of my strength the excellencie of dignitie and the excellencie of power.
 thou wast light as water.
 thou shalt not be excellent because thou wentest vp to thy fathers bed.
 then didest thou defile my bed thy dignitie is gone.
 simeon and leui brethren in euil the instruments of crueltie are in their habitacions.
 into their secret let not my soule come.
 my glorie be not thou ioyned wyth theyr assemblie.
 for in theyr wrath they slewe a man and in theyr selfe wyll they digged downe a wall.
 cursed be their wrath for it was fearce and their rage for it was cruel.
 i will deuide them in iaakob and scater them in israel.
 thou iudah thy brethren shal praise thee.
 thyne hande shalbe in the necke of thyne ennemyes.
 thy fathers sonnes shall bowe downe vnto thee.
 iudah as a lions whelpe shalte thou come vp frome the spoile my sonne.
 he shall lye downe and couche as a lyon and as alyonesse who shall ster him vp.
 the sceptre shal not departe from iudah nor a lawe giuer from betwene his fete vntill shiloh come and the people shalbe gathered vnto him.
 he shall bynde hys asse fole vnto the vine and his asses colte vnto the best vine he shall washe hys garment in wine and his cloke in the blood of grapes.
 his eyes shalbe red with wine and hys tethe white with milke.
 zebulum shall dwel by the sea side and he shalbe an hauen for shyppes.
 hys border shalbe vnto zidon.
 issachar shalbe a strong asse couchynge downe betwene two burdens.
 and he shal se that rest is good and that the land is pleasant and he shal bowe his shulder to beare and shalbe subiect vnto tribute.
 dan shal iudge his people as one of the tribes of israel.
 dan shalbe a serpent by the way and adder by the path byting the horse heles so that his ryder shal fall back warde.
 o lord i haue waited for thy saluacion.
 gad an host of men shall ouercome hym but he shal ouercome at the last.
 concerning asher his bread shalbe fat and he shal giue pleasures for a king.
 naptali shalbe a hynde let go giuing goodlie wordes.
 ioseph shalbe a fruteful bough euen a fruteful bough by the well side.
 the smale boughes shal runne vpon the wall.
 and the archers grieued hym and shot against him and hated him.
 but hys bowe abode stronge and the handes of hys armes were strengthened by the handes of the myghtie god of iaakob of whome was the feeder appointed by the stone of israel.
 euen by the god of the father who shall helpe thee and by the almyghtie who shall blesse thee with heauenlye blessyngs from aboue with blessyngs of the depe that lyeth beneath with blessyngs of the brests and of the whome.
 the blessyngs of thy father shalbe stronger then the blessynges of mine elders.
 vnto the end of the hilles of the worlde they shalbe on the head of ioseph and on the toppe of the head of hym that was separat frome his brethren.
 beniamin shall rauine as a wolfe.
 in the mourning he shall deuoure the praye and at night he shal diuide the spoile.
 all these are the twelue tribes of israel and thus their father spake vnto them and blessed them.
 euerie one of them blessed he with a seueral blessing.
 and he charged them and sayd vnto them i am ready to be gathered vnto my people.
 bury me with my fathers in the caue that is in the field of ephron the hittite.
 in the caue that is in the fielde of machpelah besides mamre in the lande of canaan.
 which caue abraham boght with the field of ephron the hittite for a possession to bury in.
 there they buryed abraham and sarah his wyfe.
 there they buryed izhak and rebekah his wife.
 and there i buryed leah.
 the purchase of the field the caue that is therein was boght of the children of heth.
 thus iaakob made an end of giuing charge to hys sonnes and plucked vp his fete into the bed and gaue vp the gost and was gathered to his people.
 then ioseph fel vpon his fathers face and wept vpon him and kissed him.
 and ioseph commanded hys seruauntes the phisicions to enbaume his father and the phisicions enbaumed israel.
 so fourty daies were accomplished for so long did the daies of them that were enbaumed last and the egyptians bewailed him seuenty daies.
 and when the daies of his mourning were past ioseph spake to the house of pharaoh saying if i haue now founde fauour in your eies speak i pray you in the eares of pharaoh and say my father made me sweare saying lo i dye buri me in my graue which i haue made me in the land of canaan.
 now therefore let me go i praie thee and bury my father and i wil come againe.
 then pharaoh said go vp and bury thy father as he made thee to sweare.
 so ioseph went vp to bury his father and with him went all the seruantes of pharaoh bothe the elders of his house and all the elders of the land of egypt.
 like wise all the house of ioseph and his brethren and his fathers house.
 onely their children and their shepe and their cattel left they in the land of goshen.
 and there went vp with him bothe charets and horsemen.
 and they were an exceading great companie.
 and they came to goren atad which is beyonde iorden and there they made a great and exceading sore lamentacion.
 he mourned for his father seuen daies.
 and when the canaanites the inhabitants of the land sawe the mourning in gore atad they said this is a great mourning vnto the egyptians.
 wherefore the name thereof was called abel mizraim which is beyonde iorden.
 so his sonnes did vnto him according as he had commanded them.
 for is sonnes caried him into the land of canaan and buryed him in the caue of the field of machpelah which caue abraham boght with the field to be a place to bury in of ephron the hittite besides mamre.
 then ioseph returned into egypt he his brethren and all that went vp with him to bury his father after that he had buryed his father.
 and when iosephs brethren sawe that their father was dead they said it may be that ioseph wil hate vs and wil paye vs againe all the euil which we did vnto him.
 therefore they sent vnto ioseph saying thy father commanded before his death saying thus shal ye say vnto ioseph forgiue now i pray thee the trespace of thy brethren their sinne.
 for they rewarded thee euil.
 and now we pray thee forgiue the trespace of the seruants of thy fathers god.
 and ioseph wept when they spake vnto him.
 also his brethren came vnto him and fel downe before his face and said beholde we be thy seruantes.
 to whome ioseph said feare not.
 for am not i vnder god.
 when ye thoght euil against me god disposed it to good that he might bring to passe as it is this day and saue muche people aliue.
 feare not now therefore i wil nourish you and your children.
 and he comforted them and spake kindely vnto them.
 so ioseph dwelt in egypt he and his fathers house.
 and ioseph liued an hundreth and ten yere.
 and ioseph sawe ephraims children euen vnto the third generacion.
 also the sonnes of machir the sonne of manaseh were broght vpon iosephs knees.
 and ioseph said vnto his brethren i am ready to dye and god wil surely viset you and bring you out of this land vnto the land which he sware vnto abraham vnto izhak and vnto iaakob.
 and ioseph toke an othe of the children of israel saying god wil surely viset you and ye shal cary my bones hence.
 so ioseph dyed when he was an hundreth and ten yere olde.
 and they enbaumed him and put him in a chest in egypt.
 